Infection of orthopedic implants with emphasis on bacterial adhesion process and techniques used in studying bacterial-material interactions

Marta Ribeiro

Fernando J. Monteiro & Maria P. Ferraz

###### Abstract

To cite this article: Marta Ribeiro, Fernando J. Monteiro & Maria P. Ferraz (2012) Infection of orthopedic implants with emphasis on bacterial adhesion process and techniques used in studying bacterial-material interactions, Biomatter, 2:4, 176-194, DOI: 10.4161/biom.22905

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.4161/biom.22905

[Online]Applied and Computational Biology, Springer, New York, 2008.

[Online]Applied and Computational Biology, Springer, New York, 2008.

 Infection of orthopedic implants with emphasis on bacterial adhesion process and techniques used in studying bacterial-material interactions

Marta Ribeiro

Correspondence to Marta Ribeiro, Email: ribero_marta80@hotmail.com

Fernando J. Monteiro

Maria P. Ferraz

###### Abstract

Staphylococcus comprises up to two-thirds of all pathogens in orthopedic implant infections and they are the principal causative agents of two major types of infection affecting bone: septic arthritis and osteomyelitisitis, which involve the inflammatory destruction of joint and bone. Bacterial adhesion is the first and most important step in implant infection. It is a complex process influenced by environmental factors, bacterial properties, material surface properties and by the presence of serum or tissue proteins. Properties of the substrate, such as chemical composition of the material, surface charge, hydrophobicity, surface roughness and the presence of specific proteins at the surface, are all thought to be important in the initial cell attachment process. The biofilm mode of growth of infecting bacteria on an implant surface protects the organisms from the host immune system and antibiotic therapy. The research for novel therapeutic strategies is incited by the emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria. This work will provide an overview of the mechanisms and factors involved in bacterial adhesion, the techniques that are currently being used studying bacterial-material interactions as well as provide insight into future directions in the field.

Orthopedic implants, bone infections, bacterial adhesion, Staphylococcus, bacteria-material interactions

## Introduction

Bone and joint degenerative and inflammatory problems affect millions of people worldwide. In fact, they account for half of all chronic diseases in people over 50 years of age in developed countries. In addition, it is predicted that the percentage of the population over 50 years affected by bone diseases will double by 2020.1

Footnote 1: http://dx.doi.org/10.4161/biom22905

An artificial implant must possess both structural and surface compatibility with the host tissue. With particular reference to bone implants, mechanical and physico-chemical compatibility is required. Each type of material used in orthopedic devices has its own advantages particularly suitable for specific applications.2 Orthopedic implant devices are intended to restore the function of load-bearing joints which are subjected to high levels of mechanical stresses, wear and fatigue in the course of normal activity. These devices include prostheses for hip, knee, ankle, shoulder and elbow joints. They also include the fracture fixation devices such as wires, pins, plates, screws, etc. Metals (Ti-6Al-4V, Co-Cr-Mo and stainless steel), polymers [poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) and ultrahigh-molecular-weight polyethylene (UHMWPE)] and ceramics (alumina, zirconia and hydroxyapatite) are the three classes of materials that are most commonly used for fabricating orthopedic implants.3 Although Ti alloys, Co-Cr alloys, and stainless steel alloys are commonly used in orthopedic devices, Ti alloys and Co-Cr alloys are the most common metals used in total-joint arthroplasty (TJA) devices.3 For example, Co-Cr alloys and ceramics are best suited for bearing surfaces, such as femoral heads, because of their superior hardness and resistance to wear.3 Ti alloys are commonly used for nonbearing surface components (femoral necks, stems and porous coatings) instead of Co-Cr or stainless steel because of their superior resistance to corrosion and because their torsional and axial stiffness are closer to those of bone, resulting in less stress shielding of bone compared with other alloys.3 Greater ductility (3-fold better percentage of elongation at fracture) of stainless steel relative to titanium and Co-Cr makes stainless steel ideal for fixation cables used in total-knee arthroplasty procedures.3 Polymers are commonly used in orthopedics as articulating surfaces of joint replacements and as inteprositional cementing material between bone and implant surfaces. The most common polymers used in TJA products are ultrahigh molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE) and polymethylmethacrylate (bone cement or PMMA). PMMA is used for fixation of joint replacement implants.4 The most important application of bioactive ceramics such as hydroxyapatite has been the coating of orthopedic metal implants, at locations where a strong interface with bone is required (i.e., femoral stems and acetabular metallbacks for the hip joints and tibial and femoral components for the knee joints).5 Alumina and zirconia are primarily used in the fabrication of femoral heads.6 On the other hand, the introduction of an implant in the body is always associated with the risk of microbial infection, particularly for the fixation of open-fractured bones and joint-revision surgeries [7]. Infection is a major problem in orthopedics leading to implant failure. It is a challenging task to treat orthopedic implant infections that may lead to implant replacement and, in severe cases, may result in amputation and mortality [8]. Sources of infectious bacteria include the environment of the operating room, surgical equipment, clothing worn by medical and paramedical staff, resident bacteria on the patient's skin and bacteria already residing in the patient's body [5]. Implant-associated infections are the result of bacteria adhesion to an implant surface and subsequent biofilm formation at the implantation site [9]. Formation of biofilm takes place in several stages, starting with rapid surface attachment, followed by multilayered bacterial cell proliferation and intercellular adhesion in an extracellular polysaccharide matrix [10]. The formation of biofilms on medical devices presents three major problems. First, bacterial communities on these surfaces represent a reservoir of bacteria that can be shed into the body, leading to a chronic infection. Second, biofilm bacteria are highly resistant to treatment with antibiotics; therefore, once these bacterial communities form, they are extremely difficult to eliminate with conventional antimicrobial therapies. Finally, because host responses and antimicrobial therapies are often unable to eliminate bacteria growing in a biofilm, a chronic inflammatory response at the site of the biofilm may be produced [11].

If bacterial adhesion occurs before tissue regeneration takes place, host defenses often cannot prevent surface colonization for certain bacterial species that are capable of forming a protective biofilm layer. Therefore, inhibiting bacterial adhesion is essential to prevent implant-associated infection, because biofilm are extremely resistant to both the immune system and antibiotics [12, 13]. Therefore, to succeed in orthopedic implants, implant materials must be habitable by bone-forming cells (favoring adhesion of osteoblasts), hinder formation of soft connective tissue (hindering adhesion of fibroblasts) and be anti-infective (discouraging bacterial adhesion) [14].

## Bacterial Infections of Orthopedic Implants

Tens of millions of medical devices are used each year and, in spite of many advances in biomaterials, a significant proportion of each type of device becomes colonized by bacteria and becomes the focus of an implant-related infection [15]. A very large proportion of all implant-related infections are caused by staphylococci (roughly four out of five), and two single staphylococcal species, respectively _Staphylococcus aureus_ and _Staphylococcus epidermidis_, account together for two out of three infection isolates [16]. They represent, in absolute, the main causative agents in orthopedics [16, 17]. While this review relates to bacteria in general, more emphasis is given to _S. aureus_ and _S. epidermidis_ since they are the main causative agents of implant-related infections in orthopedics.

**Staphylococcus.** Bacteria of the genus Staphylococcus aureus are Grampositive, nonspore forming facultative anaerobes that grow by aerobic respiration or fermentation, with diameters of 0.5-1.5 \(\upmu\)m. They are characterized by individual cocci, which divide in more than one plane to form grape-like clusters [18].

Staphylococcus comprises up to two-thirds of all pathogens in orthopedic implant infections and they are the principal causative agents of two major types of infection affecting bone, septic arthritis and osteomyelitisitis, which involve the inflammatory destruction of joint and bone; these infections are difficult to treat because of the ability of the organisms to form small colonies and to grow into biofilms. Many Staphylococcus strains, particularly _S. epidermidis_ and some _S. aureus_ strains, produce biofilm [18, 19, 20].

_Staphylococcus aureus_ is an important nosocomial pathogen, able to cause a variety of human disease conditions. It can often be found as a commensal and a transient or persistent part of the resident flora of the skin and anterior nares in a large proportion (20-50%) of the human population. However, when cutaneous/mucous barriers are breached, severe and at times life threatening infections can develop. Nosocomial infections by _S. aureus_ are particularly frequent in immunocompromised and severely debilitated patients, and prevail in the presence of indwelling medical devices [18, 21, 22, 19].

Treatment of _S. aureus_ infections is often complex, namely due to the emergence of methicillin-resistant _S. aureus_ (MRSA) strains and resistance to other classes of antibiotics. Because of its pathogenic potential and complexity of its treatment, MRSA has received more attention than its methicillin-sensitive counterpart (MSSA). MRSAs are resistant to \(\beta\)-lactam antibiotics (oxacillin, penicillin and amoxicillin), including third generation cephalosporions, streptomycin, tetracycline and sulfomanides; and upon exposure to vancomycin and other glycopeptides antibiotics, certain MRSA strains become less susceptible to these antibiotics [18, 21].

_S. aureus_ possesses several cell-surface adhesion molecules that facilitate its binding to bone matrix. Binding involves a family of adhesins that interact with extracellular matrix (ECM) components and these adhesins have been termed microbial surface components recognizing adhesive matrix molecules (MSCRAMMs). Specific MSCRAMMs are needed for the colonization of specific tissues and for the adhesion to biomaterials and to the ECM proteins deposited on the biomaterial surface. Particular MSCRAMMs include fibronectin-thin-binding proteins, fibrinogen-binding proteins, elastin-binding adhesin and collagen-binding adhesin. A number of these adhesins have already been thoroughly investigated and identified as critical virulence factors implicated in various phases of infection, including early colonization, invasion, tissue localization and cell internalization [18, 24, 25].

In recent years, the polysaccharide intercellular adhesin (PIA) has been found in many _S. aureus_ strains, and is required for biofilm formation and bacterium-bacterium adhesion [17]. This adhesin is responsible for the production of the extracellular polysaccharide matrix that makes up the biofilm. It is known that once a biofilm has formed, the bacteria within the biofilm are protected from phagocytosis and antibiotics [18].

_S. aureus_ produces virulence factors to facilitate disease causation, and rapidly develops antimicrobial resistance. The cell-surface virulence factors include the microbial surface components recognizing adhesive matrix molecules (MSCRAMMs) as receptors in the human host, other surface proteins, polysaccharide intercellular adhesin and capsular polysaccharides. The cell-surface MSCRAMMs typically are produced during exponential growth phase. The role of these various virulence factors is to provide nutrients required for survival in the host, and microbial cell protection from the host immune system during lesion formation. The secreted virulence factors, typically produced during the post-exponential and stationary phases, include a large group of exoenzymes, such as proteases, glycerol ester hydrolase (lipase) and nucleases that make nutrients available to the microorganism [18].

_Staphylococcus epidermidis. Staphylococcus epidermidis_ is the most frequently isolated member of the group of coagul-negative staphylococci (CoNS) from implant-associated infections and they are associated with nosocomial or hospital-acquired infections, and have been found to be more antibiotic resistant than _S. aureus_[17]. This group is diagnostically distinguished from _S. aureus_ by its inability to produce coagulase [18, 26, 27].

_S. epidermidis_ very often becomes the major infective agent in compromised patients, such as drug abusers and immunosupromised patients (patients under immunosuppressive therapy, AIDS patients and premature newborns). The entry door into the human body in all of these infections is usually an intravascular catheter [27]. The pathogenesis of implant-associated _S. epidermidis_ infections is characterized by its ability to colonize a surface and form a thick, multilayered biofilm, often referred to as slime. This biofilm is composed of an extracellular polysaccharide known as polysaccharide intercellular adhesin (PIA), which is essential for _S. epidermidis_ biofilm formation. PIA production is also known to protect _S. epidermidis_ from phagocytosis and other major components of the host defense system. Generally, the success of _S. epidermidis_ as a pathogen has to be attributed to its ability to adhere to surfaces and to remain there, under the cover of a protecting extracellular material, in relative silence [18, 26, 27, 28, 29].

_S. epidermidis_ does not produce many toxins and tissue damaging exoenzymes, as does _S. aureus_. To date, few ECM recognizing adhesins have been identified for _S. epidermidis_; however, adhesins to fibronectin, fibrinogen, vitronectin and collagen have been identified [18, 27].

**Bone tissue infections.** Bone tissue infections, namely osteomyelitisitis, septic arthritis and prosthetic joint infections (PJI), still represent the worst complications of orthopedic surgery and traumatology. The main pathways of infection for osteomyelitisitis, septic arthritis and PJI are either hematogenous, resulting from bacteremia; contiguous, when the infection is transmitted from local tissue; or direct, resulting from infiltration of bone, often following injury, surgery or implantation of a foreign body, such as joint replacement [20, 20, 30, 31, 32, 33].

_Osteompelitis._ Osteomyelitis describes a range of infections in which bone is colonized with microorganisms, with associated inflammation and bone destruction. The occurrence, type, severity and clinical prognosis of osteomyelitisitis depend on the interplay of a triad of factors, including the characteristics and virulence of the infecting pathogen, the properties of the host and the source of infection [20, 30].

The most common etiologic agents causing osteomyelitisitis are _Staphylococcus aureus_, _Pseudomonas aeruginosa_, _Staphylococcus epidermidis_ and _Escherichia coli_. Historically, _S. aureus_ has been the dominant pathogen for all classes of osteomyelitisitis, accounting for 45% of infections; however, the appearance of the microorganism dropped to 27% by 1988 [30, 34].

The establishment of osteomyelitisitis begins with the infiltration of microorganisms into the body. Early infections are usually related to trauma or contamination during surgery; however, a number of improvements in surgical procedures have been responsible for reducing the infection rate. Late infections, which may not occur until after a number of months postoperatively, can also result from bacterial contamination during trauma, surgery or via remote infections. In many of these cases, bacteria introduced during trauma or surgery became dormant for an extended period of time [30, 34].

Haematogenous osteomyelitisitis most frequently affects children and the elderly [55]. In children, the incidence is typically between 1 in 5,000 and 1 in 10,000 [36]. It has been argued that the incidence of hematogenous osteomyelitisitis is decreasing with an annual fall in childhood cases of 0.185 per 100,000 people recorded in Glasgow, Scotland between 1970 and 1997 [36, 37, 38]. Conversely, osteomyelitisitis resulting from direct infection is reported as being increased [39, 38]. This is probably due to motor-vehicle accidents and the increasing use of orthopedic fixation devices and total joint implants [38].

Implanted biomaterials can act as an avenue for both bacterial contamination and colonization toward the development of osteomyelitisitis. The mechanisms of infection are quite complex and vary with the species of bacteria. If the conditions are favorable, bacteria create an initial attachment to the surface. A permanent attachment develops as protein adhesin-receptors form along with a polysaccharide film after the distance between the cell and the surface is sufficiently reduced. Because biomaterials do not elicit an antiphagocytic reaction toward bacteria after adhesion, these are able to multiply and colonize freely on implant surfaces [34].

_Septic arthritis._ Septic arthritis is a joint disease typified by bacterial colonization and rapid joint destruction and it manifests as a serious infection characterized by pain, fever, swelling and even loss of function in one or more affected joints [20, 31]. The most commonly involved joints are the knees and hips [31].

In all age and risk groups, the most frequent causative organisms identified are _Staphylococcus aureus_ followed by other gram-positive bacteria, including streptozotocin [40, 41].

Numerous different factors have been identified for developing of septic arthritis. These factors include rheumatoid arthritis or osteoarthritis, joint prosthesis, low socioeconomic status, intravenous drug abuse, alcoholism, diabetes, previous intra-joint corticosteroid injection and cutaneous ulcers [41].

The yearly incidence of septic arthritis is between 2 and 10 in 100,000 in the general population but it may be as high as 30-70 per 100,000 in rheumatoid arthritis patients or recipients of prosthetic joints [42, 43, 44] and is more common in children than in adults, and in males rather than in females [45]. The incidence of septic arthritis seems to be rising, and this increase is linked to augmented orthopedic-related infection [46] and an aging population, more invasive procedures being undertaken and enhanced use of immunosuppressive treatment.[56]

Mortality for septic arthritis varies in different studies, but seems to be around 11% for monoarticular sepsis.[47] In view of the 11% mortality rate for septic arthritis, patients should be admitted to hospital for prompt assessment, supportive care and intravenous antibiotic treatment, along with measures to aspirate pus from the joint.

_Posthetic joint infections._ The implantation of prosthetic joints along with the use of other implantable orthopedic devices (e.g., pins, screws, plates and external fixators) has improved the quality of life greatly and restored function to patients suffering from debilitating bone and joint disease or injury. Based on conservative estimates, millions of people worldwide have some form of prosthetic joint or other implantable orthopedic device. Among the possible complications associated with implantation, infection is the most serious and occurs in 1 to 13 percent of the cases; the resulting consequences include postoperative prosthesis failure, chronic pain and immobility.[32]

Proshetic joint infections (PJIs) occur less frequently than aseptic failures but represent the most devastating complication. These infections are a major threat, as therapy is difficult, resulting in a significant increase in hospitalization-related morbidity and mortality.[48, 49]

The most common agents are _Staphylococcus aureus_ and _Staphylococcus epidermidis_, which account for close to 65% of PJIs. They are the most commonly reported microorganisms both in early and late infections and in total knee and hip arthroplasty.[48]

**Table 1** summarizes the classification of prosthetic joint infection according to the route of infection and the time of symptom onset after implantation.[50]

Numerous different factors have been identified as increasing a patient's risk for developing an infection of a prosthetic joint or orthopedic implant. These factors include rheumatoid arthritis, immunocompromised states, diabetes mellitus, poor nutritional status, obesity, psoriasis, long-term urinary catheterization, extreme age, surgical site infection and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).[32, 48]

Proshetic joint infections (PJIs) of total hip arthroplasty (THA) or total knee arthroplasty (TKA) occur with an incidence of 1.5\(-\)2.5% for primary THA or TKA, respectively, whereas revision THA or TKA carries a respective infection risk of 3.2% or 5.6%.[51] Additionally, prosthetic joint infection is an economic burden; the estimated cost of treating an infected prosthetic joint in the US is $50,000 to $60,000.[32] The attendant mortality was estimated, in the 1970s and 1980s, to be between 2.7% and 18%[33] in older patients. Fisman et al. have estimated the mortality attendant to surgical intervention for PJI to be 0.4\(-\)1.2% for 65-y-old patients and 2\(-\)7% for 80-y-old patients.[54] The mortality reported since 1989 has ranged between 1% and 2.7%.[55] In patients with primary joint replacement, the infection rate in the first two years is usually \(<\) 1% in hip and shoulder prostheses, \(<\) 2% in knee prostheses and \(<\) 9% in elbow prostheses.[56] In addition, infection rates after surgical revision are usually considerably higher (up to 40%) than after primary replacement.[56] In two studies in patients with prosthetic hip and knee associated infection, 29\(-\)45% had an early, 23\(-\)41% had a delayed, and 30\(-\)33% had a late infection.[57, 58]

In the future, it is expected that the incidence of prosthetic joint infections will further increase due to (1) better detection methods for microbial biofilms involved in prosthetic joint infections, (2) the growing number of implanted prostheses in the aging population and (3) the increasing residency time of prostheses, which are at continuous risk for infection during their implanted lifetime.[59]

## Bacterial Adhesion

The research of bacterial adhesion and its significance is a large field covering different aspects of nature and human life. Adhesion of bacteria to human tissue surfaces and implanted biomaterial surfaces is an important step in the pathogenesis of infection, whereby the bacteria can divide and colonize the surface.[60, 61, 62]

Generally, any structures responsible for adhesive activities can be called adhesins. Bacteria may have multiple adhesins for different surfaces (different receptors). A receptor is a component on the surfaces of biomaterials or host tissue that is bound by the active site of an adhesion during the process of specific adhesion.[51]

During development of micro-colonies, some strains of bacteria, particularly _Staphylococcus epidermidis_, secrete a layer of

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c} \hline \hline
**Classification** & **Characteristic** \\
**According to the route of infection** & \\ \hline Perioperative & Inoculation of microorganisms into the surgical surgery or immediately thereafter \\ Hematogenous & Through blood or lymph spread from a distant focus of infection \\ Contiguous & Contiguous spread from an adjacent focus of infection (eg, penetrating trauma, pre-existing osteomyelitis, skin and soft tissue lesions) \\ \hline
**According to the onset of symptoms after implantation** & \\ \hline Early infection (\(<\) 3 m) & Predominantly acquired during implant surgery or the following 2 to 4 d and caused \\ Delayed or low-grade infection (3\(-\)24 m) & Predominantly acquired during implant surgery and caused by less virulent organisms \\ Late infection (\(>\) 24 m) & Predominantly caused by hematogenous seeding from remote infections \\ Reproduced with permission from reference 50. & \\ \hline \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: Classification of prosthetic joint infections -slime after adhering to the implant surface, making themselves less accessible to the host defense system and significantly decreasing antibiotic susceptibility. Slime, an extracellular substance (exopolymers composed mainly of polysaccharides) produced by the bacteria, may protect the bacteria from antibiotic therapy, physiologic shear, and possibly host cell-mediated defenses. Bacterial strains that do not produce slime are less adherent and less pathogenic. [60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116 shear rates above 500 sec-1. However, in the case of lower number of receptors/cell this optimum flow rate was not clear.[84]

Concentrations of electrolytes, such as KCl, NaCl and pH value of the culture environment also influence bacterial adhesion.[61, 69] Changes in pH can have a marked effect on bacterial growth and adhesion. Bacteria possess membrane-bound proton pumps that extrude protons from the cytoplasm to generate a transmembrane electrochemical gradient, i.e., the proton motor force.[85] The passive influx of protons in response to the proton motive force can be a problem for cells attempting to regulate their cytoplasmic pH.[86] Bacteria respond to changes in internal and external pH by adjusting the activity and synthesis of proteins associated with many different cellular processes.[86] Studies have shown that a gradual increase in acidity increases the chances of cell survival in comparison to a sudden increase by rapid addition of HCl.[87] This suggests that bacteria contain mechanisms in place which allow the bacterial population to adapt to small environmental changes in pH. However, there are cellular processes which do not adapt to pH fluctuations so easily. One such process is the excretion of exopolymeric substances ( polysaccharides). Optimum pH for polysaccharide production depends on the individual species, but it is around pH 7 for most bacteria.[88] Hamadi et al.[89] investigated the adhesion of _Staphylococcus aureus_ ATCC 25923 to glass at different pH values and observed that pH influenced bacterial adhesion. The images obtained by SEM showed that the adhesion behavior of _S. aureus_ ATCC 25923 depended on the pH of the suspending medium and at highly acidic (pH 2 and pH 3) and alkaline conditions, the cells deposited in aggregate forms, while at pH 5 the aggregation phenomenon was absent. The quantitative adhesion (number of adhering cells to glass surface) showed that cells adhered strongly in the pH range 4 to 6 and weakly at highly acidic (pH 2 and pH 3) and alkaline conditions.[89] Kinnari et al.[90] studied whether the most common causative agents of orthopedic implant-related infections, _S. aureus_ and _S. epidermidis_, can penetrate the ceramic pores and adhere particularly avidly to that surface at a slightly acidic pH, stimulating conditions to which they may be exposed in vivo.[90] The isoelectric point of the materials at the surface-liquid interface changes with the decrease in pH following infection, surgery, trauma or aseptic implant loosening.[90, 91] On these occasions, the pH of the bone tissue environment often falls below pH 7, whereas in healthy tissues this pH value varies in the range 7.35 to 7.45.[90] The ceramic materials used by Kinnari et al.[90] were hydroxyapatite (HA) and biphasic calcium phosphate (BCP) that are widely employed as bone substitutes.[90] Their porosity and the decrease in surrounding pH as a result of surgical trauma may, however, pre-condition these materials to bacterial infections. The authors showed that when pH decreased from 7.4 to 6.8, the adherence of staphylococci both to HA and BCP surfaces decreased significantly. Moreover, in this study they observed that HA and BCP ceramics did not have pores large enough to allow the internalization of staphylococci. Therefore, their anti-adherent properties seemed to improve when pH value decreased, suggesting that HA and BCP biocercamics are not compromised upon orthopedic use.

The presence of antibiotics decreases bacterial adhesion depending on bacterial susceptibility and antibiotic concentration.[90, 91, 92, 89] Kohnen et al.[93] showed that _S. epidermidis_ adhesion on catheters was reduced when catheters where impregnated with rifampicin-sparfoxactin that were released slowly with time from catheter surface.[93] Stigter et al.[94] developed a biomimetic approach for coating titanium alloy (TiOAl4V) implants with calcium phosphate containing an antibiotic. The authors showed that the coatings, containing botramycin, were effective against the growth of _S. aureus_ in a concentration-dependent manner. These results demonstrated the efficacy of the biomimetic coatings combined with tobramycin, to prevent local post-surgical infections in orthopedic surgery.[94] The most important fact is that bacteria normally grow as biofilms.[95] The bacteria in biofilms can be differentiated from free-floating planktonic forms by an extracellular polymeric substance, slower growth rate and the up- or down-regulation of certain genes. The extracellular polymeric substance acts as a filter and conduit for nutrients and minerals that are channeled to interior cells and protects cells from potentially harmful agents, including antibiotics.[96] The prevalence of biofilms in infections and on surfaces of medical implant devices has focused attention on the increased antibiotic resistance (10\({}^{3}\)-fold) of biofilm-resident bacteria vs. the more commonly studied planktonic (free-floating) form.[97] It is postulated that biofilms contribute to antibiotic resistance by at least three mechanisms: reduced antibiotic penetration across the extracellular polymeric substance, a favorable (e.g., anaerobic) environment within the inner layers and bacteria cell differentiation and role specialization providing increased protection.[98] Even if antibiotic therapy is effective against some of bacteria in a colony, surviving bacteria can feed themselves of left behind nutrients.[99] As a result, bacteria in biofilms survive exposure to concentrations of antibiotics 10\({}^{3}\)-fold higher than lethal values found for cells in suspension.[98] It has been suggested that if a low concentration of antibiotics or other drugs is able to prevent initial bacterial adherence to surfaces, the subsequent step of biofilm formation would also be inhibited.[100] However, it has previously been shown that in the case of staphylococcal strains the initial adherence and subsequent biofilm formation are two distinct phenomena.[101, 102] Cerca et al.[26] evaluated the adherence of several clinical isolates of coagul-negative staphylococci (CoNS) to acrylic and the effect of sub-minimal inhibitory concentrations (sub-MICs) of vancomycin, cefazolin, dicloxacillin and combinations of these antibiotics on adherence and biofilm formation. They showed that most of these antibiotics resulted in effective reduction of bacterial adherence to acrylic, in some cases reaching over 70% adherence inhibition, and when strains with a high biofilm-forming capacity were grown in sub-MICs of those antibiotics, there existed combinations of the drugs that significantly inhibited biofilm formation. However, they also saw that most of the antibiotic combinations that inhibited adherence did not have a profound effect on biofilm formation. In general, these results indicated that the effect on adherence inhibition was greater than the effect on inhibiting biofilm formation.[26] Prado et al.[103] evaluated the susceptibility of planktonic and biofilm-associated organisms of _Streptococcus pneumoniae_ to antibiotics. The authors also realized that amoxicillin, erythromycinomycin and levofloxacin were less active against biofilm-associated organisms as compared with their planktonic counterparts [103]. Thus, the most promising anti-infective strategies seek to inhibit bacterial adhesion prior to biofilm formation. Reducing bacterial adhesion during the initial 6 h period following implantation is particularly important to avoid device-associated infection [104]. Pagano et al. [105] evaluated the differences between a prophylactic and therapeutic approach to the CoNS biofilm problem. These authors showed that by adding low concentrations of linczold or vancomycin before the bacteria could reach the surface, they were able to inhibit biofilm formation. However, if the application of the drug was delayed just by 6 h after initial adherence occurrence, the inhibition of biofilm formation was less effective [105].

All of these factors may influence bacterial adhesion by either changing physical interactions in phase one of adhesion or changing surface characteristics of bacteria or materials [61].

_Material surface characteristics._ The factors influencing bacteria adherence to a biomaterial surface include chemical composition of the material, surface charge, hydrophobicity, surface roughness or physical configuration [61, 69].

Surface chemistry influences bacterial adhesion and proliferation. Materials with different functional groups change bacterial adhesion in a manner depending on material hydrophobicity and charge [69].

Surface roughness is a 2-dimensional parameter of a material surface measured by roughness measuring systems. Biomaterials surface roughness is another relevant property for the bacterial adhesion process, with the irregularities of the material surfaces normally promoting bacterial adhesion and biofilm accumulation whereas an ultra-smooth surface does not favor bacterial adhesion and biofilm accumulation [106]. This is due to the increased surface area and depression in the roughened surfaces that provide more favorable and additional sites for colonization [61, 69]. Ozturk et al. investigated the adhesion of biofilm forming _S. epidermidis_ strain YT-169a on nitrogen (N) ion implanted as well as on as-polished CoCrMo alloy materials and the adhesion test results showed that N _epidemidis_ strain YT-169a adhere much more efficiently to the N implanted surfaces than to the as-polished CoCrMo alloy surface. This was attributed mainly to the rougher surfaces associated with the N implanted specimens in comparison with the relatively smooth surface of the as-polished specimen [107].

Teughels et al. [108] also found that an increase in surface roughness facilitated biofilm formation on implant surfaces [108]. However, the accumulation of bacteria in such locations depends largely on their size, cell dimension and division mode [109]. According to Katainen et al. [109], surfaces may have roughness in several length scales, but due to the short range of the van der Waals interactions, roughness in the nanoscale ultimately determines the adhesion strength. This is corroborated by another study [110] where the impact of nanometer-scale roughness on bacterial adhesion was tested and according to which, a reduction in the nanoscale roughness (of R\({}_{\text{a}}\) = 2.1 nm to R\({}_{\text{a}}\) = 1.3 nm) lead to a strong increase in the number of adhered bacteria. Therefore, it seems that roughness at a nanoscale can strongly influence initial attachment of bacteria, probably by providing the presence of a greater number of contact points. Truong et al. have shown that the adhesion of bacterial cells on titanium surfaces is promoted by the presence of nanoscale topographical features [111]. Whitehead et al. have studied bacterial colonization on nanostructured titanium surfaces, and demonstrated improved colonization efficiency when surface roughness increases [112]. Webster et al. [113] evaluated the adhesion of _Pseudomonas fluorescens_ on nanophased alumina, compared with conventional grain size alumina substrates. They observed greater _P. fluorescens_ attachment to nanophased as compared with conventional alumina. Moreover, the ability of a nanostructured surface to influence irreversible adhesion, attachment of _P. fluorescens_ to alumina was followed after fibronectin was allowed to adsorb to the surfaces. Results of this study indicated a greater adhesion of _P. fluorescens_ in this environment as well [113]. Colon et al. [114] examined the functions of _S. epidermidis_ (known to be detrimental to orthopedic implant efficacy) and osteoblasts (or bone-forming cells) on ZnO and titania (TiO\({}_{\text{2}}\)), that presented nanostructured compared with microstructured surface features. ZnO is a well-known antimicrobial agent and TiO\({}_{\text{2}}\) readily forms on titanium once implanted. When normalized to the projected surface area, they observed significantly decreased _S. epidermidis_ colony forming units on nanophase compared with microphase ZnO as well as TiO\({}_{\text{2}}\) (by 60% and 69%, respectively) and osteoblast adhesion increased by 146% and 200% on nanophase compared with microphase ZnO and TiO\({}_{\text{2}}\), respectively, leading to improved calcium mineral deposition on two nanophased ceramics: ZnO and TiO\({}_{\text{2}}\). Although the exact mechanism is not known, some comments for why _S. epidermidis_ adhesion decreased on these nanophase ceramics were made by these authors. For example, it has been suggested that ZnO reduces bacterial activity through the release of ZnO ions to the local environment, which alters protein adsorption and intracellular mechanisms pertinent to bacteria activities. Following this line of thought, two important properties may be responsible for decreasing bacterial adhesion on nanophased as compared with microphased ceramics: increased surface area and greater numbers of surface grain boundaries. Higher surface areas of nanophased as compared with microphased ZnO may result in the increased presence of soluble ZnO ions to disrupt bacteria activities. Moreover, the increased presence of soluble ZnO ions that disrupt bacterial activities may have resulted from the fact that greater material dissolution occurs at grain boundaries and more grain boundaries are present on the surfaces of nanophased compared with microphased ZnO. The aspect ratio of ZnO nanoparticles used in that study may also have influenced bacterial adhesion. Therefore, this study suggests that nanophased ZnO and TiO\({}_{\text{2}}\) may reduce S. epidermidis adhesion and increase osteoblastic performance required to promote the efficacy of orthopedic implants [114]. Since clinically different prostheses or implant devices have different surface roughnesses that may play a role in bacterial adhesion and implant infection, more studies are needed to test the effects of a broader range of surface roughness values.

Physical configuration of a material surface is different from surface roughness and is rather complicated. It is a morphological description of the pattern of a material surface, such as a monofilament surface, a braided surface, a porous surface or a grid-like surface, and it is a 3-dimensional parameter.[61, 69] Merrit et al.[115] showed that porous materials had significantly higher infection rates than nonporous materials when implanted subcutaneously in mice that were challenged with _Staphylococcus aureus_. Therefore, the implant site infection rates are different between porous and dense materials with porous materials having a much higher rate. This implies that bacteria preferentially adhere and colonize on the porous surface.[115, 116] Moreover, bacteria adhere more to grooved and braided materials compared with flat ones, probably partially due to increased surface area. Physical configurations are routinely evaluated by scanning electron microscopy.[61, 69]

Metal surfaces have a high surface energy and are negatively charged and hydrophilic as shown by water contact angles, while polymers have low surface energy and are less electrostatically charged and hydrophobic.[61] The structure of water in the region near any surface (such as solid material surface or bacterial surface) is perturbed over distances of up to several tens of molecular layers. Near a hydrophobic surface the water is less structured in terms of intermolecular hydrogen bonding between the water molecules, while near a hydrophilic surface water is more structured. Water contact angle (WCA) is a good example of the hydrophobic or hydrophilic nature of a surface. A high WCA represents hydrophobicity and a low WCA represents hydrophilicity.[61] The hydrophobicity of a material surface has been evaluated mainly by contact angle measurement. Depending on the hydrophobicity of both bacteria and material surfaces, bacteria adhere differently to materials with different hydrophobicities.[61, 69] A microorganism may adhere to a substratum via the hydrophobic effect if the associating sites possess sufficiently high densities of apolar areas.[117] In staphylococcal species, for instance, these hydrophobic areas are provided by proteins that are covalently bound to the cell wall.[118] Charville et al.[119] also showed that the pre-treatment of the PVC surface with bovine serum albumin (BSA) originated a decrease of surface hydrophobicity and reduced bacterial adhesion for each of the three species tested. Katsikogianni et al.[74] reported that diamond-like carbon coated PVC exhibited lower levels of _S. epidermidis_ adhesion probably due to reduced hydrophobicity in comparison to uncoated PVC. Moreover, these authors also found that the fluorinated PVC presented a slightly higher level of _S. epidermidis_ adhesion compared with the sterilized PVC, probably due to the increased hydrophobic properties of its surface.[74] In this study, Katsikogianni et al. also showed that _S. epidermidis_ was a moderate hydrophobic bacterium; therefore adhesion was favored to the most hydrophobic substrate, which, in their case, was the fluorinated surface. However, the relatively small increase in _S. epidermidis_ adhesion observed for the fluorinated surface may be due to the moderating effect associated with the reduction in surface roughness of the fluorinated PVC. The reduction in surface roughness would mean fewer sites for bacteria to adhere despite the more favorable hydrophobic surface.[74] The surface coating of substrates with proteins, such as BSA, bovine glycoprotein, or fatty-acid free BSA decreases the hydrophobicity of the surface, leading to an inhibition of bacterial adhesion to surfaces.[61]

_Bacterial characteristics._ For a given material surface, different bacterial species and strains adhere differently since they have different physicochemical characteristics.[61, 69]

Surface hydrophobicity of bacteria is an important physical factor for adhesion, especially when the substrata surfaces are either hydrophilic or hydrophobic. Generally, bacteria with hydrophobic properties prefer hydrophobic material surfaces; the ones with hydrophilic characteristics prefer hydrophilic surfaces and hydrophobic bacteria adhere to a greater extent than hydrophilic bacteria.[61, 69] The hydrophobicity of bacteria varies according to bacterial species and is influenced by growth medium, bacteria age and bacterial surface structure.[61, 69] Walker et al.[120] found a decrease in adhesion and hydrophobicity of _Escherichia coli_ during mid-exponential compared with the stationary phase. These observations were attributed to hydrophilic (acidic) proteins on the outer membrane of _E.coli_ that decrease with the culture age, and consequently lead to a decrease in hydrophobicity and adhesion.[120] Kuntiya et al.[121] also found that cell surface hydrophobicity of _Pseudomonas_ sp decreased with increasing cellular age. Moreover, Kuntiya et al.[121] showed that changing the medium composition by the addition of sodium chloride (0.5% w/v) resulted in a faster decrease in the cell surface hydrophobicity. The authors explained that there appear to be at least three possible reasons for the observed changes in hydrophobicity. First, the presence of salts has been reported to increase exopolysaccharide production although the mechanism is not completely understood; this may, however, account for a drop in hydrophobicity, if the exopolysaccharides are predominantly neutral or hydrophilic. Second, it has been reported that the production of exopolysaccharides is higher with aged cells. Third, nutrient starvation in the batch culture may be another reason for lowering the hydrophobicity since this also triggers the production of exopolysaccharides.[121] Therefore, these results demonstrated that the presence of sodium chloride in the medium and cellular age did affect cell surface hydrophobicity and consequently biofilm formation and growth. It was reported that marked differences in both the slime production and _S. epidermidis_ adhesion were observed when comparing four culture media.[122] Slime production was notably poor in used peritoneal dialysis fluid (PUD). Adherent growth was markedly increased in a chemically defined medium (HHW) and synthetic dialysis fluid (SDF) but was poor in tryptic soy broth (TSB) and PUD when air containing 5% CO\({}_{2}\) was used. These findings emphasize the advantages in using chemically defined and biological fluids when studying slime production and adhesion of _S. epidermidis.[122]_

The surface charge of bacteria may be another important physical factor for bacterial adhesion. The surface charge attracts of opposite charge in the medium and results in the formation of an electric double layer. Most particles acquire a surface electric charge in aqueous suspension due to the ionization of their surface groups. Bacteria in aqueous suspension are almost always negatively charged. The surface charge of bacteria varies according to bacterial species and is influenced by the growth medium, the pH and the ionic strength of the suspending buffer, bacterial age and bacterial surface structure. [61, 69]

_Serum or tissue proteins._ It is well accepted that the protein adsorption is the first event following blood-material contact. The process of protein adsorption from an aqueous solution onto a solid surface is typically described in three steps. First, transportation of the protein from the solution toward the solid surface occurs. This is followed by attachment of the protein to the surface, and finally the protein structure undergoes a conformational change after adsorption. [123, 124]

When an implant is inserted into host tissue, small biomolecules including extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins adsorb onto the material surface to form a conditioned protein layer conducive to the adherence of free floating planktonic bacteria. The adhered bacteria then rapidly proliferate, recruit other cells and produce sticky secretions to form dense communities of attached cells called biofilms. [125, 126]

Serum or tissue proteins, such as albumin, fibronectin, fibrinogen, laminin, denaturated collagen and others, promote or inhibit bacterial adhesion by either binding to substrata surfaces, binding to the bacterial surface or by being present in the liquid medium during the adhesion period. Most of the bindings between bacteria and proteins are specific ligand-receptor interactions. Proteins may also change the adherent behavior of bacteria by changing bacterial surface physicochemical characteristics. [61, 69]

_Fibronectin_. Fibronectin (FN) is a protein that seems to promote adhesion of certain strains. FN clearly promotes _S. aureus_ adhesion to the substratum surface. [61, 69] The binding of FN to a strain of _S. aureus_ is specific, time-dependent and irreversible. [61, 69] Therefore, in the presence of FN, the adherence of _S. aureus_ to foreign surfaces is significantly increased. Most studies showed that adsorbed FN promotes adherence of bacteria, especially _staphylococci_ to biomaterials. [61, 69]

In the fibronectin molecule, two different binding sites are known for staphylococci adhesion: a first binding site in the N-terminal domain and a second near the C-terminus. [127] A study by surface plasmon resonance reported a higher affinity of _S. epidermidis_ for the C-terminal fragment. [128] FN has played a crucial role in promoting bacterial adhesion to biomaterial surfaces.

In the last few decades, it has become clear that many bacteria possess fibronectin-binding proteins and that such proteins can bind to a growing number of sites in fibronectin. [129]

_S. aureus_ produces a number of surface proteins that are likely to be involved in the initial attachment to host tissues. These proteins, which have been termed MSCRAMMs (microbial surface components recognizing adhesive matrix molecules) bind specifically to components of the ECM. One such component of the ECM is fibronectin and it has binding sites for several pathogens. [130, 131, 132]_S. aureus_ has been shown to specifically bind to adsorbed fibronectin. This bacterium has two fibronectin-binding proteins, FnBPA and FnBPB, encoded by the closely linked genes _fnhA_ and _fnbB_, both of which contribute to the adherence to fibronectin-coated surfaces. At least one of two genes coding for the very similar surface proteins FnBPA and FnBPB is found in almost all clinical isolates of _S. aureus_. This fibronectin-binding proteins (FnBPs) are involved in the pathogenesis of infection. [133, 134, 135]

_S. epidermidis_ has also been reported to bind to a number of host cell extracellular matrix proteins, including fibronectin. In vitro studies have shown that _S. epidermidis_ can bind to biomaterials coated with fibronectin. [131] However, compared with _S. aureus_ little is known about how _S. epidermidis_ interacts with matrix proteins. [131] It was found that in _S. epidermidis_ 1585v overexpression of a 460 kDa truncated isoform of the ECM-binding protein (Embp) is necessary for biofilm formation. This _S. epidermidis_ cell surface-associated protein termed Embp is a giant fibronectin-binding protein. Studies using Embp-expressing strains adhered significantly stronger to the fibronectin-coated surface compared with Embp-negative strains, indicating that Embp mediates _S. epidermidis_ adherence to fibronectin. Furthermore, a quantitative association between fibronectin amounts used for plate coating and _S. epidermidis_ adherence was found, indicating that here, fibronectin is essential for bacterial binding. These findings suggest that Embp plays a role during primary attachment to conditioned surfaces. [136, 137]

_Albumin_. Albumin adsorbed on material surfaces has shown obvious inhibitory effects on bacterial adhesion to polymer, ceramic and metal surfaces. [61, 69] An et al. showed that human serum albumin (HSA) inhibited _S. epidermidis_ adhesion to cpTi surfaces by more than 95% after treatment of the cpTi sample with 200 mg/mL of HSA at 37\({}^{\circ}\)C for 2 h. [62] Kinnari et al. [138] also showed that the level of adherence of both _S. aureus_ and _P. aeruginosa_ was significantly lower on the HSA-coated titanium surface than on the uncoated surface, with overall bacterial adhesion dependent on bacterial concentration. Adhesion of _S. aureus_ on HSA-coated surfaces was significantly inhibited (from 82% to 95% depending on the concentration) and the adhesion of _P. aeruginosa_ was inhibited from 29% to 37%. However, the inhibitory effects of HSA seem to depend on bacterial strain and species, as indicated by a previous study, [138] due to differences between bacterial strains in terms of their cell surface properties. [139] Albumin may inhibit adhesion through binding to the bacterial cells or by changing the substratum surface to more hydrophilic character. [140, 139]

In a study, a cross-linked albumin coating reduced the prosthetic infection rate in a rabbit model. Animals with albumin-coated implants had a much lower infection rate (3/11 animals, 27%) than those with uncoated implants (8/13 animals, 62%). [141] This finding may represent a new method for preventing prosthetic infections.

However, in a recent study, Prado et al. [142] showed that the effect of HSA on ability of _Strapprooccus pneumoniae_ strains to form biofilms on polystyrene plates was concentration dependent and HSA at concentrations from 40 to 25,000 mg/mL stimulated bacterial growth, while higher concentrations produced bacterial inhibition. The activity of HSA to prevent biofilm formation was concentration and strain dependent with the greater efficacy at concentrations 0.5 x minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC). [142] Although the use of HSA for preventing biofilm formation on abiotic material has been proposed, these results showing that certain concentrations of this compound produced stimulation of bacterial growth and even significantly increased biofilm formation by 2 out of the 11 strains tested could be a serious drawback of such approach [142]. Naves et al. [145] also showed that HSA inhibited biofilm formation by all _E. coli_ strains on polystyrene plates, but as a possible drawback, it stimulated bacterial growth.

_Fibrinogen._ Fibrinogen (Fig) is another important protein that mediates bacterial adhesion to biomaterials and host tissues [146]. Fibrinogen promotes bacterial adhesion by bridging the biomaterial surface with bacterial cell membrane receptors specific to Fig. [145]. Such interactions are responsible for bacterial adhesion to medical devices in vivo, and bacteria possessing the ability to specifically bind surface-adsorbed Fg have been found to be responsible for significantly more clinical orthopedic device-associated infections than those without Fg-binding proteins [146].

Charville et al. showed that the extent of _S. aureus_, _S. epidermidis_ and _Escherichia coli_ adhesion was greater to PVC substrates with pre-adsorbed Fg compared with substrates without protein. However, the most significant increase was observed in the case of _S. aureus_, where adhesion to Fg-coated substrates was more than 5 times that of uncoated controls [119]. Baumgartner et al. [147] also reported similar results for _S. aureus_ adhesion to polyurethane surfaces with pre-adsorbed Fg. Pei et al. [148] found that _S. epidermidis_ adhesion to control catheters without pre-adsorbed functional Fg was approximately half that observed at Fg-coated catheters. Collectively, the data indicate that the increase in bacterial adhesion in the presence of Fg is the result of specific Fg-mediated interactions between the bacterial cells and the substrate [149, 150, 151, 152, 153].

_Laminin._ Laminin has a promoting effect on _S. aureus_ and CNS adhesion to PMMA coverslips but to a lesser extent compared with the effects of FN and fibrinogen [145]. The presence of laminin receptors in _S. aureus_ has also been reported [154].

_Seman._ The role of serum proteins in mediating bacterial adhesion has also been evaluated. Some studies have revealed a strong inhibition of adherence of bacteria to biomaterials in the presence of whole serum [155, 156]. Ardehali et al. [157] observed a marked, up to 5-fold, reduction in bacterial adhesion to polyurethane (PU) surfaces in the presence of bovine/human serum or plasma at 0.5% or higher concentration. Moreover, the authors reported that the inhibition of bacterial adhesion by serum is to a large extent due to apo-transferrin [157].

## Techniques Used in Studying Bacterial-Material Interactions

Bacterial interactions are of prime importance in the many stages of the lifecycle of a bacterium [158]. Specific bacterial interactions are mediated by polymeric substances which are present on the outside of the cell wall. Highly diverse classes of surface constituents have been implicated in bacterial interactions, such as slime, surface proteins, lipopolysaccharidead, lipoteichoic acids, capsules, lectins and fimbriae or pili [158]. These specific interactions between bacterial surface structures and substratum surfaces imply a firmer bacterial adhesion to a surface by the selective bridging function of bacterial surface polymeric structures. In fact, the functional part of these structures should be the adhesins, especially when the substrata are host tissues [159, 160, 161, 162]. Subsequently, certain bacterial strains are capable of forming a biofilm if provided with an appropriate supply of nutrients. During biofilm formation, bacteria secrete a slime layer that retains nutrients and protects the microorganisms from the host immune response [61, 62, 75]. Biofilms are the most common mode of bacterial growth in nature and are also important in clinical infections, especially due to the associated high antibiotic resistance [163, 164, 165]. Investigations of phenomena such as irreversible cell adhesion (i.e., the initial stage of the biofilm formation) to surfaces and an understanding of factors affecting spatial arrangement of biofilms, including the distribution and composition of microorganisms within the biofilm matrix and characterizing properties of this matrix, are recognized as essential in understanding the function of biofilms [166, 167].

A fundamental aspect of the study of bacterial adhesion and attachment to surfaces is the need for reliable quantification of the microbiological population that attaches to the surface. Several experimental techniques have been developed to study and quantify bacterial adhesion on material surfaces. Since this is a very exhausting topic, only the commonly used techniques and the basic principles will be summarized in **Table 2**.

Metabolic assays are also excellent candidates for quantification of bacterial viability in biofilms. These assays are indirect methods based on the detection of metabolic products produced by bacteria and have the advantage of being able to assess viability without sample manipulation since these assays generally do not require the removal of the biofilm from the adherent surface [168]. Moreover most assays are simple, fast and perfectly suitable for high-throughput quantification of biofilms grown in a microtiter plate [169]. Some of these assays, including colorimetric biomass (crystal violet), Syto 9, reszaurin and fluorescein diacetate (FDA), will also be summarized in **Table 2**.

However, it is important to mention that several conditions during the biofilm formation process can affect the results obtained including growth conditions, the cultivation medium and the surface selection. Growth conditions are very different among the available literature, namely different physiological states influence adhesion and biofilm formation. The stationary growth phase is the most common among other works from the literature. The bacterial inoculums should be determined with caution since it is known that increased inoculums increase biofilm density. So the exact size of the inoculums should be determined by adjusting to a specific optical density or absorbance. In order to avoid error in the optical reading, cell clusters should be avoided using a brief agitation and/or filtration. The medium for biofilm cultivation is also known to be crucial to the biofilm formation ability [170].

After the biofilm incubation step, the parameters that have been identified as being extremely important for biofilm quantification and which are not usually taken into account and/or omitted in the previously published work are: (1) bacterial removal and rinsing procedures of the wells as it assures the removal of non-adherent cells while keeping biofilm integrity. For * [119] M. C. C.

 

[MISSING_PAGE_POST]

 this, special caution should be taken in terms of the number of washings (two or three times with PBS is the most often) and the washing technique, because if it is insufficient it may lead to false-positives and if it is excessive to false-negatives.[170] Extremina et al. recommend the three washing procedure and the careful pipetting of the wells to avoid compromising biofilm integrity. (2) Another important issue that is often omitted in the literature is the need to measure planktonic growth before washing. Extremina et al. showed that _E. facetium_\(1162\Delta\)_cap_ had higher planktonic index compared with the other tested strains, although being a non-biofilm producer. This procedure allows you to measure the engagement of bacteria to form biofilms by normalizing biofilms formation by the growth index, thus obtaining the biofilm formation index (BFi). For this purpose, the easiest way is to transfer the bacterial suspension to a new microtiter-plate and measure the optical density in a microtiter-plate reader. (3) It is crucial that the selection of the method takes into consideration the specific target for quantification. (4) Finally, of utmost importance is the interpretation of results and evaluation of assay quality.[170]

In the study conducted by Extremina et al., the use of BFi confirmed that E\(1162\Delta\)_cap_ isolate is a good negative control for biofilm quantification and demonstrates the importance of knowing the growth index of different sets of strains or conditions in order to compare biofilm formation values. Cut-off values (ODc) separate biofilm-producing from non-biofilms producing strain,[171] which is in accordance with previously described work.[172, 173] Z' factor[174, 175] indicated high quality for the different assays during the optimization process, thus confirming a good repeatability and reproducibility of the experimental procedures. This study recognizes that parameters for classification of biofilm producers (cut-off values), evaluation of assay accuracy (BFi), and quality (Z' factor) are of utmost importance for evaluation, comparison and validation of biofilm screening assays.[170]

## Concluding Remarks and Future Perspectives

Better understanding of the interaction between microorganisms, the implant and the host may improve our current approach to the diagnosis and treatment of implant-associated infections. Despite several efforts to find medical therapies to treat biofilm infections, the physical removal of an infected medical device is often necessary, thus carrying an additional economic cost. Therefore, there is great interest in finding methods or strategies to inhibit biofilm formation. Several strategies have been proposed to achieve this on medical devices, including the use of antibiotics, development of new anti-adhesive medical surfaces and coating medical devices with several different compounds, including antibiotics. Applying antimicrobial agents is an easy and frequently used way to control biofilms. However, many antimicrobial agents that are effective against planktonic bacterial cells turn out to be ineffective against the same bacteria when growing in a biofilm. Combined use of multiple antimicrobial agents with different chemistries and modes of action may be a strategy to improve the performance of these antimicrobial agents and circumvent bacterial adaptation. However, the tremendous resistance of biofilms to conventional antibiotic therapy has prompted a great deal of research on synthetic surfaces and coatings that resist bacterial colonization.

Several biomaterials used in orthopedic surgery show different susceptibilities to infection, because adhesion and growth of infecting bacteria are controlled by biomaterial surface properties, like hydrophobicity and roughness. Controlling the topography and hydrophobic properties of materials surfaces is likewise a way to influence bacterial interaction with the surface and must be taken into account when developing novel anti-infective biomaterials.

However, since bacterial adhesion is a very complex process affected by many factors, such as bacterial and material properties and environment, further studies are required to understand the

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{p{42.7pt} p{113.8pt}} \hline
**Techniques** & **Aluminations** \\ \hline \multicolumn{1}{p{42.7pt}}{The fluorogenic dye Sytro9 is a nucleic acid stain, which diffuses passively through cellular membranes and binds to DNA of both viable and dead cells.[171] As DNA is also a substantial part of the extracellular matrix.[172] this staining will provide information on total biofilm biomass. Sytro9 has previously been used in CLSM studies of biofilm composition and morphology.[203] This stain has also been used for the routine quantification of bacterial and yeast biofilm biomass.[202, 201]

Resazurin is a common metabolic activity indicator that has been shown to be effective in assessing bacterial viability[202] and in biofilm quantification.[199] Resazurin, the main component of Alamar Blue, is a blue redox indicator that can be reduced by viable bacteria in the biofilm to pink resourfin.[204] Thus continued growth maintains a reduced environment (pink) and the extent of conversion from blue to pink is a reflection of cell viability.[205] Peeters et al. showed that resazurin viability assay is a good alternative for quantification of microbial biofilms grown in microtiter-plates.[199]

\begin{tabular}{p{42.7pt} p{113.8pt}} \hline Fluorescein (FDA) atecaffe (FDA) assay & **Aluminations** \\ \hline \multicolumn{1}{p{42.7pt}}{Weak microbial cells are capable of converting non-colored, non-fluorescent fluorescein detectable (FDA) into yellow, highly fluorescent fluorescentassay by non-specific intra- and extracellular esterases. FDA has been used for the quantification of biofilm biomass and viability.[202, 203]

\end{table}
Table 2: Techniques to study and quantify the microorganisms attached to a surface and the bacterial viability in biofilms (continued) mechanisms of bacterial adhesion and implant infection, and to provide adequate methodologies to prevent them to occur. Future research must strive to better understand the pathogenesis of implant-related infections, with a special attention on the alarming phenomenon of antibiotic resistance. Future investigations should also focus on designing animal model systems to study in vivo-grown biofilms and infections.

All the above mentioned techniques provide us with an impressive array of tools for investigating bacteria-material interactions in vitro. Each one has certain advantages and limitations with respect to the others. However, although they cannot be routinely used because of the cost, complexity of the set up and time required to give results, are useful in studying bacteria-material interactions.

## Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest

No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

## Acknowledgments

This work was financed by FEDER funds through the Programa Operacional Factors de Competitividade (COMPETE). The support of Projects NanoforBone (NORTE-01-0202-FEDER-005372) and NaNOBiofilm (PTDC/SAU-BMA/111233/2009) are greatly acknowledged.

## References

* [1] Navarro M, Michauri A, Cattano O, Planell JA Bionnateriula in orthopaeless. J R Soc Interface 2008; 5:1137-58, PMID:18667387; http://doi.org/10.1098/fld.2008.10151
* [2] Smith KR, Hutz TR, Abher MA, Anderson HC, Canon WI, Robinson RG. The effect of a stiff spinal implant on the bone-mined connect of the lumbar spine in dogs. J Bone Jour Surg Am 1991; 7:3115-23, PMID:1859381
* [3] Piali F, Dalmore NB. Calcium phosphate coatings for bio-implane applications: Materials, performance factors, and methodologies. Mater 26 Eng Rep 2009; 66:1-70. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mermer.2009.05
* [4] Long PTH. Medical devices in orthopedic applications. Toxicol Paolol 2008; 36:85-91; PMID:1837225; http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0192632303710951
* [5] Chowler J, Greinshall L, Certins * [36] Weichner S, Sharland M, Clarke MM, Faure SN, Acute haemogenous compounds in children: is there any evidence for how long we should treat? Curr Opin Index Dis 2008. 212:285-67. [Add.doi:10.1097/OSCO.DODO135283005441
* [37] Blych MJ, Kincaid R, Craignen MA, Benner GC. The changing epidemiology of acute and subacute haemogens ontonomyilis in children. J Bone Joint Surg Br 2001; 83:99-102; PMLP:11245548; https://dx.doi.org/10.1037/091-602-8381.10699
* [38] Lanzini I, Mader T, Collband JH, Otosenvlitis in long bones. . J Bone Joint Surg Am 2004; 86:A-2305-18; PMLP:1546676
* [39] Gallespe M, Fyaldemiology in bone and joint infection. Infer Dis Clin North Am 1990; 4:361-76; PMLP:22125978; https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s15010-0042-011
* [40] Dubot J, Sorbier M, De Champs C, Ristori JM, Busiere JL, Sanweia B. No changes in the distribution of organisms responsible for septic arthritis or a 20 year period. Ann Elevent Dis 2002; 61:67-9; PMLP: 11830437; https://dx.doi.org/10.1136/ad.61.3267
* [41] Matches V, Wencu C, Jones A, Field M, Coaley G, Bacterial septic arthritis in adults. Lancet 2010; 375:846-55; FMID:20260778; https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/05104-07540/61955-5
* [42] Goldenberg DP, Sepetz ardrinks. Lancet 1998; 351: 197-202; PMID:949882; https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S014-07540/709522-2
* [43] Nade S, Sepetz ardrinks. Bost Pract Res Clin Rheumat 2003; 17:183-200; PMID:12877520; https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1521-042-02200606-7
* [44] Stot NS, Peshararite bone and joint infection. J Onberg Surg 2001; 9:83-90;
* [45] Leices M, Sepel JB, L. A swollen joint: why all the fast Am J Ther 2005; 10:219-24; PMID:1275642; https://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00045391-2005000-00009
* [46] Grossson J, Shadevitvit S, Vijayn A, Sspie Artifs in Iceland 1990-2002; increasing incidence due to imogging infections. Ann Rheum Dis 2008; 67:638-6; PMID:17070188; https://dx.doi.org/10.1136/ad.2007.077131
* [47] Cokley G, Matches V, Eidd M, Jones A, Kingley G, Walker D, et al. British Society for Rheumatology Standards, Guidelines and Audit Working Group, BSR & RIPR, BOA, RCP and BSASA guidelines for management of the hot website in adults. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2006; 45:1039-41; PMLP: 1682954; https://dx.doi.org/10.1095/rheumatology/kdl.63a
* [48] Erposito S, Leone S, Prosthetic joint infections: microbiology, diagnosis, management and prevention. Int J Animimicroh Agents 2008; 32:287-3; PMLP: 18617373; https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.janntimicroh.2008.03.030
* [49] Rohde H, Buandar EC, Siemssen N, Frommell L, Buuddaki C, Winter S, et al. Polyachromatic intercellular adhesion or protein factors in biofilm accumulation of _Symphowasic patients and Staphylococcus aureus_ in isolated from prosthetic hip and knee joint infections. Biomaterials 2007; 28:1711-1720; PMLP: 17187854; https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biometrikais.2006.11.006
* [50] Trampu A, Zimmerli W, Prosthetic joint infections: update in diagnosis and treatment. Swiss Med Wlyk 2005; 135:2453:511201595826
* [51] Hansan AD, Rand JA, Evaluation and treatment of infection at the site of a total hip or knee arthroplasty. Int Journe Coster 1999; 48:1112-1120; PMLP:1008953
* [52] Scalo DY, The economic impact of infected joint arthroplasty. Orthopedis 1993; 18:871-3; PMLP: 857094
* [53] Brotheri E, Hansen AD, Duffy MC, Seckelberg JM, Ilknup DM, Harmen WS, et al. Riok faction for prosthetic joint infection: case-control study. Clin Infoc Dis 1998; 27:1247-54; PMLP:087278; https://dx.doi.org/10.1086/5314991
* [54] Fraum DN, Reilly DT, Karchane AP, Goldie SJ, TLA Decreased _Symphowasic patients_ indishea and increased osteolkate functionality on antibiotic-loaded platinum networks. Biomaterials 2007; 28:4880-8; PMLP: 17077097; https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biometrikais.2007.07/07/07
* [55] Katsugianian M, Musitiu VF. Conceire review of mechanisms of bacterial adhesion to biomarkers and of techniques used in estimating bacteria-material interactions. Eur Cell Mater 2004; 8:37-57; PMLP: 15593018
* [56] Stewart PS, Conteron JW. Antibiotic resistance of bacteria in biofilms. Lancet 2001; 35:1845-5; PMLP: 1146549; https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biometrikais.2007.010.016/05104-0754
* [57] Guillen SI, Garbier P, Osdner PE, Zimmerli W. Management of infection associated with total hip arthroplasty according to a treatment algorithm. Infection 2004; 32:222-22; PMLP: 152978; https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s15010-0042-020-1
* [58] Laffer R, Garbier P, Ochner P, Zimmerli W. The case for differentiated orthopedic-mappacient of prosthetic knee-associated infection. 44th ICAC, American Society for Microbiology, 2004; Washington, DC 2004; Abstrut K-113;
* [59] Zimmerli W, Infection and muscokaddicted condition: Posthetic-joint-associated infections. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumat 2006; 20:1045-6; PMLP: 17127196; https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bech.2006.08
* [60] Vachebause K, Temenoff JS, Higashi JM, Gary A, Anderson JM, Nugrou R, et al. Bacterial private properties by individual soft/software applications using determine adhesion on polyethylene. J Biomed Mater Res 1998; 24:253-25; PMLP: 7788956; http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/C3101079436(10)98210543-452;MID:1023-3;CO2-F
* [61] A,P, Friedman PJ, Genchev MF, J * [81] Klappel, Rurg GJ, Czugg R, Purvudj B, Scodlay P, Viscolastic fluid description of bacterial biofilm material properties. Biotechnol Bieng 2002; 80:289-96; PMCMID:12226861; http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/bibi.10376
* [82] Karsikogiann MG, Minstiff's: Interactions of bacteria with specific biomaterial surface medium under condition. Acta Biometri 2010; 6:1107-118; PMID:19671455; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2009.006
* [83] Liu Y, Tyler J-H. The essential role of hydrodynamic shear force in the formation of biofilm and granular sludge. Water Res 2002; 36:1635-164; PMCMID:12044605; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2010.00379-7
* [84] Mohamed N, Rainer TR, Jr., Ross JM, Novel experimental study of receptor-mediated bacterial adhesion under the influence of fluid shear. Biotechnol Bieng 2000; 68:628-6; PMCMID:1079987; http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/(3ICI)1097-0290(20000620)68<628:MID:BATES>0.COCO-2D
* [85] Romind BM, Bacterial communication of dental unit warterter--a water is your particular spreading into your mouth? Clin Microbiol Neurol 2003; 25:7-3; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2003.09380016-8
* [86] Garret TR, Bakloo M, Zhang B. Bacterial adhesion and biofilms on surfaces. Proc Nat Soc 2008; 18:1049-5; 56; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2008.04.001
* [87] Li Y, Hanna MN, Svenniec G, Elen RP, Cwikowski DCG, Cell density modulates acid adsorption in _Spraguewaters_. J Bacteriol 2001; 18:3687-8; PMCMID:11698377; http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/B.183.25.687-8842.2001
* [88] Oliveira R, Rude L, Oliveira A, Salguato R, Polyuschardale production and biofilm formation by Pseudomonas fluorescent effects of pH and surface material. Sciat J Sur 1991; 2:416-419; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0927-7765(9)080016-2
* [89] Hamad F, Larneh H, Malborosh M, Elghani A, Choustrun A Eloumi M, et al. Effect of pH on distribution and adhesion of _Spraguewaters_ to glass. J Adhes Sci Technol 2005; 19:78-8; picol.org.
* [90] Kinnai TJ, Esteban J, Martino-Hija NZ, Sanchez-Matoro O, Sanchez-Salrado S, Cella M, et al. The influence of surface porosity and pH on bacterial adherence to hydroxyapatite lipid and biphasic calcium phosphate biocomas 2. J Med Microbiol 2009; 58: 132-7; PMCMID:19074665; http://dx.doi.org/10.1099/jum.002758.0
* [91] Kontinu YI, Takagi M, Mandelin J, Lasusu J, Sio J, Aniola M, et al. Acid attack and cathepsin X in bone resorption around toll in replacement perspectives. J Bone Mater Res 2001; 16:1780-1780; PMCMID:11585341; http://dx.doi.org/10.1359/jbma.2001.16.10.1780
* [92] Ferra MH, Muncar A, Sousa T, Montrun JF, Nunebodyav * [124] Lunnunn D, Jones L, Albumin adaption to contact lens materials a review. Cont Lens Anterior Eye 2008; 31:179-87; PMID:18603467; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.dao.2008.05.004
* [125] Khox, Y.C'feei, A. Nair SA, Snyder BD, Kenan DJ, Grunfell MW, _Spetholensacan acuro_ resistance on titanium coated with multiagent flexo/detectra-ped * [165] Chandra J, Mukherjee PK, Liedich SB, Fadolol FF, Hoyer LL, Douglas LJ, et al. Antifunjal resistance of candidial biofilms formed on denature acrylic in _inv. J._ Demt Res 2001; 590:389-38; PMID:1137993; http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0202034950100031101
* [166] Bech IB, Smith JR, Sreele AA, Penger I, Campbell SA. The use of atomic force microscopy for studying interaction of bacterial biofilms with surface. Calg Surf B. Biointer 2002; 23:231-47; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S09277-765(01020338)
* [167] Ouro K. Biophysical approaches to study the dynamic process of bacterial adhesion. Res Microbiol 2008; 1594-252; PMID:11855942; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.remic.2008.04.007
* [168] Weld K, Cai Y, Stromme M. A Method for Quantitative Determination of Biofilm Viability. J. Struct Biomet 2002; 3:814-813; http://dx.doi.org/10.3590/fb3020418
* [169] Peeters E, Nelis HJ, Comey T. Comparison of multiple methods for quantification of microbial biofilms grown in microtiter plants. J Microbiol 2008; 72:157-65; PMID:1185579; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mitter.2007.11.010
* [170] Extremina GL, Costa L, Aguir A, Polo L, Fonseca AP. Optimization of processing conditions for the quantification of enforced biofilms using microtiter plates. J Microbiol 2011; 84:167-73; PMID: 21081140; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mitter.2010.11.007
* [171] Stepransov S, Vukuoz D, Hals V, D Bouwerman G, Djokic S, Caldavici I. et al. Quantification of biofilm in microtiter plates: overview of testing conditions and practical recommendations for assessment of biofilm production by staphylococci. APMI 2007; 115:891-9; PMID:1766944; http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1004-0045-2007-gen.50x
* [172] Hecken E, Bourean JM, Willem RL. Entorecated surface protein Esp is important for biofilm formation of _Eurourokinase_ in1162. J. Biechechech 2007; 189:823-40; PMID:17827282; https://dx.doi.org/10.1128/B.01205-07
* [173] LaPlane KL, Memand LA. Two activities of relaxation and ammonium agint biofilm-producing staphylococcus aureus. _53:pilipp 207. Animal NM, Muldy MR, Schman I, Simer AE, Imali AA. Epidemiological typing of methicillin-resistant _Sapphiretones acrnet strains_ by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. J Microbiol Methods 2007; 69:146-53; PMID:17316469; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jminnet.2006.12.022
* (286) Lin M, Al-Hidy M, Chang S, Huang Y, Cximine AG, Kang DH, et al. Rapid determination of Alaychobacillus strains in apple juice by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. I: Journal of Microbiol 2005; 155:307-76. PMID:16126239; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jtipadonna.2005.04.018
* (287) Goodacre R, Shun B, Gilbert BJ, Timmins EM, McGrover AC, Alberg BK, et al. Detection of the dipicinic acid biomarker in Bacillus spores using Curie-point pyrolysis mass spectrometry and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. and Chem 2000; 72:119-27. PMID:10055643; http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/a.990661i
* (288) Helm D, Labischinski H, Schalleh G, Naumann D. Classification and identification of bacteria by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. J Gen Microbiol 1991; 137:69-79. PMID:1710646; http://dx.doi.org/10.1099/00212287;137-169
* (289) Maquellt K, Knuder C, Choo-Smith LP, Ngo-Thi NA, van Vreewijk T, Stamlerler M, et al. Prospective study of the performance of behavioral spectrocessing for rapid identification of bacterial and fungal gmos recovered from blood cultures. J Clin Microbiol 2003; 413:249. PMID:12517868; http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/C04/1.314.3249.22003
* (291) Ozkk I, Hary DL, Doyle RI. Meschological Approaches to Analysis of Adhesion and Adhesion. In Orik I, Harry DL, Doyle RI, eds, Bacterial Adhesion to Animal Cells and Tissues. Washington, DC: ASM Press, 2003:191-40.
* (292) Timmerman CF, Fleet A, Bennier JM, De Grael L, Cermes F, Verhoef J. Characterization of a protein-locus adhesion of _Sapphiretones acrnet strains_ to polymerase. Indirect Immunity 1991; 59:4187-92; PMID:1682256
* (293) Ahimou F, Paquor M, Jacques P, Thomar P, Rouchlet PG. Influence of electrical properties on the evaluation of the surface hydrophobicity of _Gaudlet_ biofilms in suspension and CDC reactor grown biofilms. J Microbiol Methods 2005; 63:287-95; PMID:15936097; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jminnet.2005.03.014
* (294) Chantang MH, van der Schar JS, Koererer W, Kroonem J, van der Meer W, Hammen H, et al. Biofilm formation by Escherichia coli is stimulated by synergistic interactions and co-achhesion mechanisms with adherence-protein bacteria. Res Microbiol 2006; 155:471-48; PMID:16570636; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jminnet.2005.005
* (295) Sarker SD, Nahar L, Kumnasamy Y. Microdrive plateaued antibacterial ausy incorporating uranium as an indicator of cell growth, and its application in the _in silico_ mitochondrial screening 2003; 149:353-62; PMID:1624197; http://dx.doi.org/10.1099/mic.205932-0
* (296) Pirs B, Hamilton MA, Zuber N, Stewart S. A. microstructure-driven modelling of zebra-protein signaling method for biofilm disinfection and removal. J Microbiol Methods 2003; 54:269-76; PMID:12782328; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jminnet.2005.0017-0201030;34-64
* (297) Boulos L, Prevoux M, Barbosa E, Collart J, Desjardins R, Livyrev DEANd: Bablight : application of a new rapid straining method for direct examination of viable and bacterial bacteria in drinking water. J Microbiol Methods 1999; 397:786. PMID:10937564; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jminnet.2005.001-000048-2
* (300) Whiteuch CH, Tokler N, Tsuei T, Rugu TC, Minick JS, Eurechtar DNA repaired for bacterial biofilm formation. Science 2002; 295:1457. PMID:11859186; http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.295.5559.1487
* (301) Garshman M, Wingnader J, Flemming HC. Application of fluorescently labelled lectins for the visualization and biochemical characterization of poly-scrachrachics in biofilms of _Transodium magnesium_, J Microbiol Methods 2002; 50:237-48; PMID:12031574; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.sictotenv.2004.05.003
* (302) Honner K, Georghebour E, Nabi HB. Comparison of tree assays for the quantification of _Gaudlet_ biofilms in suspension and CDC reactor grown biofilms. J Microbiol Methods 2005; 63:287-95; PMID:15936097; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jminnet.2005.03.014
* (303) Honner K, Nils HJ. Use of modified robbins for the induction of \(S\) measured biofilm formation by Escherichia coli is stimulated by synergistic interactions and co-achhesion mechanisms with adherence-protein bacteria. Res Microbiol 2006; 155:471-48; PMID:16570636; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jminnet.2005.005
* (304) Sarker SD, Nahar L, Kumnasamy Y. Microdrive plateaued antibacterial ausy incorporating uranium as an indicator of cell growth, and its application in the _in silico_ mitochondrial screening 2003; 149:353-62; PMID:1624197; http://dx.doi.org/10.1099/mic.205932-0
* (305) Pirs B, Hamilton MA, Zuber N, Stewart S. A. microstructure-driven modelling of zebra-protein signaling method for biofilm disinfection and removal. J Microbiol Methods 2003; 54:269-76; PMID:12782328; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jminnet.2005.0017-0201030;34-64
* (306) Boulos L, Prevoux M, Barbosa E, Collart J, Desjardins R, Livyrev DEANd: Bablight : application of a new rapid straining method for direct examination of viable and bacterial bacteria in drinking water. J Microbiol Methods 1999; 397:786. PMID:10937564; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jminnet.2005.001-000048-2
* (307) Whiteuch CH, Tokler N, Tsuei T, Rugu TC, Minick JS, Eurechtar DNA repaired for bacterial biofilm formation. Science 2002; 295:1457. PMID:11859186; http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.295.5559.1487
* (308) Garshman M, Wingnader J, Flemming HC. Application of fluorescently labelled lectins for the visualization and biochemical characterization of poly-scrachics in biofilms of _Transodium magnesium_, J Microbiol Methods 2002; 50:237-48; PMID:12031574; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.sictotenv.2004.05.003
* (309) 