Visceral adiposity is associated with metabolic profiles predictive of type 2 diabetes and myocardial infarction

Javeria Raheem

1The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 2Departments of Physiology and Nutritional Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 3MRC Population Health Research Unit at the University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7LF, UK. 4Department of Radiology and Clinical Neuroscience, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada. 5Department of Health Sciences, Universite du Québec a Chicoutiment, Chicoutiment, QC, Canada. 6Clinical Cardiology and Rare Lipid Disorders Unit, Community Genetic Medicine Center, Department of Medicine, Universite de Morrell, Montreal, QC, Canada. 7ECOGENE-21, Chicoutiment, QC, Canada. 8Departments of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, Centre Hospital Universe Suite-Jaxting, Universite de Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada. 9Departments of Psychology and Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 10These authors contributed equally: Javeria Raheem, Eeva Sliz. 1Email: zdERA.pausova@scididds.ca

Jean Shin

1The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 2Departments of Physiology and Nutritional Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 3MRC Population Health Research Unit at the University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7LF, UK. 4Department of Radiology and Clinical Neuroscience, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada. 5Department of Health Sciences, Universite du Québec a Chicoutiment, Chicoutiment, QC, Canada. 6Clinical Cardiology and Rare Lipid Disorders Unit, Community Genetic Medicine Center, Department of Medicine, Universite de Morrell, Montreal, QC, Canada. 7ECOGENE-21, Chicoutiment, QC, Canada. 8Departments of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, Centre Hospital Universe Suite-Jaxting, Universite de Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada. 9Departments of Psychiatry and Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 10These authors contributed equally: Javeria Raheem, Eeva Sliz. 1Email: zdERA.pausova@scidds.ca

Jean Shin

1The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 2Departments of Physiology and Nutritional Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 3MRC Population Health Research Unit at the University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7LF, UK. 4Department of Radiology and Clinical Neuroscience, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada. 5Department of Health Sciences, Universite de Morrell, Montreal, QC, Canada. 6Clinical Cardiology and Rare Lipid Disorders Unit, Community Genetic Medicine Center, Department of Medicine, Universite de Morrell, Montreal, QC, Canada. 7ECOGENE-21, Chicoutiment, QC, Canada. 8Departments of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, Centre Hospital Universe Suite-Jaxting, Universite de Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada. 9Departments of Psychiatry and Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 10These authors contributed equally: Javeria Raheem, Eeva Sliz. 1Email: zdERA.pausova@scidds.ca

Jean Shin

1The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 2Departments of Physiology and Nutritional Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 3MRC Population Health Research Unit at the University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7LF, UK. 4Department of Radiology and Clinical Neuroscience, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada. 5Department of Health Sciences, Universite de Morrell, Montreal, QC, Canada. 6Clinical Cardiology and Rare Lipid Disorders Unit, Community Genetic Medicine Center, Department of Medicine, Universite de Morrell, Montreal, QC, Canada. 7ECOGENE-21, Chicoutiment, QC, Canada. 8Departments of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, Centre Hospital Universe Suite-Jaxting, Universite de Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada. 9Departments of Psychiatry and Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 10These authors contributed equally: Javeria Raheem, Eeva Sliz. 1Email: zdERA.pausova@scidds.ca

Jean Shin

1The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 2Departments of Physiology and Nutritional Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 3MRC Population Health Research Unit at the University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7LF, UK. 4Department of Radiology and Clinical Neuroscience, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada. 5Department of Health Sciences, Universite de Morrell, Montreal, QC, Canada. 6Clinical Cardiology and Rare Lipid Disorders Unit, Community Genetic Medicine Center, Department of Medicine, Universite de Morrell, Montreal, QC, Canada. 7ECOGENE-21, Chicoutiment, QC, Canada. 8Departments of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, Centre Hospital Universe Suite-Jaxting, Universite de Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada. 9Departments of Psychiatry and Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 10These authors contributed equally: Javeria Raheem, Eeva Sliz. 1Email: zdERA.pausova@scidds.ca

Jean Shin

1The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 2Departments of Physiology and Nutritional Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 3MRC Population Health Research Unit at the University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7LF, UK. 4Department of Radiology and Clinical Neuroscience, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada. 5Department of Health Sciences, Universite de Morrell, Montreal, QC, Canada. 6Clinical Cardiology and Rare Lipid Disorders Unit, Community Genetic Medicine Center, Department of Medicine, Universite de Morrell, Montreal, QC, Canada. 7ECOGENE-21, Chicoutiment, QC, Canada. 8Departments of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, Centre Hospital Universe Suite-Jaxting, Universite de Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada. 9Departments of Psychiatry and Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 10These authors contributed equally: Javeria Raheem, Eeva Sliz. 1Email: zdERA.pausova@scidds.ca

Jean Shin

1The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 2Departments of Physiology and Nutritional Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 3MRC Population Health Research Unit at the University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7LF, UK. 4Department of Radiology and Clinical Neuroscience, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada. 5Department of Health Sciences, Universite de Morrell, Montreal, QC, Canada. 6Clinical Cardiology and Rare Lipid Disorders Unit, Community Genetic Medicine Center, Department of Medicine, Universite de Morrell, Montreal, QC, Canada. 7ECOGENE-21, Chicoutiment, QC, Canada. 8Departments of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, Centre Hospital Universe Suite-Jaxting, Universite de Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada. 9Departments of Psychiatry and Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 10These authors contributed equally: Javeria Raheem, Eeva Sliz. 1Email: zdERA.pausova@scidds.ca

Jean Shin

1The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 2Departments of Physiology and Nutritional Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 3MRC Population Health Research Unit at the University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7LF, UK. 4Department of Radiology and Clinical Neuroscience, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada. 5Department of Health Sciences, Universite de Morrell, Montreal, QC, Canada. 6Clinical Cardiology and Rare Lipid Disorders Unit, Community Genetic Medicine Center, Department of Medicine, Universite de Morrell, Montreal, QC, Canada. 7ECOGENE-21, Chicoutiment, QC, Canada. 8Departments of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, Centre Hospital Universe Suite-Jaxting, Universite de Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada. 9Departments of Psychiatry and Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 10These authors contributed equally: Javeria Raheem, Eeva Sliz. 1Email: zdERA.pausova@scidds.ca

Jean Shin

1The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 2Departments of Physiology and Nutritional Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 3MRC Population Health Research Unit at the University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7LF, UK. 4Department of Radiology and Clinical Neuroscience, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada. 5Department of Health Sciences, Universite de Morrell, Montreal, QC, Canada. 6Clinical Cardiology and Rare Lipid Disorders Unit, Community Genetic Medicine Center, Department of Medicine, Universite de Morrell, Montreal, QC, Canada. 7ECOGENE-21, Chicoutiment, QC, Canada. 8Departments of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, Centre Hospital Universe Suite-Jaxting, Universite de Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada. 9Departments of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, Centre Hospital Universe Suite-Jaxting, Universite de Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada. 10These authors contributed equally: Javeria Raheem, Eeva Sliz. 1Email: zdERA.pausova@scidds.ca

Jean Shin

1The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 2Departments of Physiology and Nutritional Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 3MRC Population Health Research Unit at the University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7LF, UK. 4Department of Radiology and Clinical Neuroscience, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada. 5Department of Health Sciences, Universite de Mu Québec a Chicoutiment, Chicoutiment, QC, Canada. 6Clinical Cardiology and Rare Lipid Disorders Unit, Community Genetic Medicine Center, Department of Medicine, Universite de Morrell, Montreal, QC, Canada. 7ECOGENE-21, Chicoutiment, QC, Canada. 8Departments of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, Centre Hospital Universe Suite-Jaxting, Universite de Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada. 9Departments of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, Centre Hospital Universe Suite-Jaxting, Universite de Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada.

 Multi- subsamples--these models were adjusted for age, height, genetic relatedness, and shared family environment.

Finally, we tested--in both adolescents and adults--if the BMI-adjusted metabolomic profile of VF is similar to the BMI-adjusted metabolomic profiles of T2D, MI and IS from previous open-access studies of adults using the same Nightingale NMR-based metabolomics platform we used in the present study [67]. Data for 87 metabolomic variables that were available in all studies were used to determine correlations between the effect of VF and the effects estimates derived from odds ratios of T2D, MI and IS. First, odds ratios (and corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CIs)) were log-transformed to get all these values on the beta estimate scale and, subsequently, each beta (and CI) was scaled to the effect on VLDL-TG to facilitate comparison of the effect similarities regardless of the magnitude of the absolute effect that may vary due to differences in study settings. VLDL-TG was selected to be the scaling factor because it is among the metabolic measures most strongly associated with VF and it shows a positive association also with T2D, MI, and IS. These scaled beta estimates were used to determine correlations (Pearson's \(r\)) between the metabolomic profiles of VF vs. T2D, MI and IS. We further derived standard errors for each association as follows: \(\mathrm{SE}=(\mathrm{CI95upper}-\mathrm{CI95lower})/(2^{\mathrm{\circ}}1.96)\). Using the scaled beta estimates and derived standard errors, we estimated for each

Fig. 1: **Associations between visceral fat measured directly with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and selected key metabolomic measures in adolescents and adults.** A visceral fat, which is fat around internal organs, and subcutaneous fat, which is fat outside the abdominal cavity and underneath the skin, were quantified at the level of the umbililics with MRI; native and fat-segmented images are shown. **B** Associations between visceral fat and metabolomic measures were studied using linear regression models in up to 507 adults and 938 adolescents. All variables were inverse rank-transformed to normality and adjusted for age, sex, age-by-sex interaction, genetic relatedness, and family environment. V visceral fat was additionally adjusted for height. In further models, visceral fat was additionally adjusted for body mass index (BMI) or subcutaneous fat (SF). The effect sizes and corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CD) are in standard deviation (SD) units. The 14 lipoprotein subfractions are 6 every-low-density lipoproteins (VLDL), 1 intermediate-density lipoprotein (DDL), 3 low-density lipoproteins (LDL), and 4 high-density lipoprotein (HDL) subfractions. The lipoproteins are sorted by size from extra-extra-large (XXL) to extra-large (XL), large (L), medium (MV), small (S) and extra-small (XS). SFA saturated fatty acids, MUFA mono-unsaturated fatty acids, PUFA polyunsaturated fatty acids, Omega-6 omega-6 fatty acids, LA linoleic acid, Omega-3 omega-3 fatty acids, DHA docosahexaenoicacid, and Glycrole glycoprotein acetyls.

 metabolic measure if the difference between the effects of VF vs. CMD (T2D, MI, or SI) is significant: \(Z\!=\!(\text{beta}_{1}\text{-beta}_{2})\)/ sqrt(\(\text{se}_{1}\!\text{$\times$}2+\text{se}_{2}\!\text{$\times$}2\)). The \(p\) values for \(Z\) were derived from the normal distribution. We further re-evaluated the similarities between metabolomic profiles of VF and CMD in sensitivity analyses using a subset 15 of noncorrelated metabolic measures identified using hierarchical clustering (R function "hcut").

**Reporting summary**. Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.

**Results and discussion**

In the studied sample, the prevalence of overweight or obesity was 68% in adults and 28% in adolescents, which is similar to the Canadian population at large [20, 21]. The average BMI was 27.9 kg/m\({}^{2}\) in adults and 21.8 kg/m\({}^{2}\) in adolescents. Consistent with previous research indicating that VF increases with age more than SF\({}^{11},\,\text{VF}\) volume was four-times larger and SF volume two-times larger in adults than in adolescents. On average, both adults and adolescents were normoglycemic and normolipidemic; as expected, glucose, total TGs, LDL-cholesterol and HDL-cholesterol were higher in adults than in adolescents (Table 1).

The key results are shown in Figs. 1 and 2. Serum levels of all 228 metabolomic measures are given in Supplementary Data 1. Inter-generational differences in the metabolomic measures were similar to those described previously [22] (Supplementary Data 1). The full association profile of VF with the 228 metabolomic measures is plotted in Fig. S2 and a numerical presentation is given in Supplementary Data 2. The complete results from the remaining BMI- and SF-adjusted models, as well as sex-separate models, are plotted in Figs. S3-S8 and tabulated in Supplementary Data 3-8. Below, we highlight the main findings.

**Many aspects of the metabolic profile of VF are in line with the direct effects of VF on the liver**. We found that higher VF is associated--independently of BMI or SF--with higher TG-rich VLDL particles, lower HDL particles in the very large and large subfractions, higher HDL particles in the small subfraction, higher branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) and higher systemic inflammation (Fig. 1b). Although directionality cannot be interpreted from these cross-sectional associations, previous evidence strongly suggests that obesity-related aberrations in circulating metabolome are likely a consequence rather than a cause of excess adiposity [4, 10]. Many of the observed associations speak for the direct effect of VF on the liver: VF unlike SF trains to the liver via the portal circulation, thus exposing the liver directly to the VF-released proinflammatory molecules and FAs, among others [11, 23]. Many of these molecules (e.g., tumor necrosis factor a [24]) impair hepatic actions of insulin and, thus, increase hepatic gluconeogenesis and synthesis of TG-rich VLDL particles [25], and decrease hepatic catabolism of AAs (and BCAAs in particular). Higher concentrations of TG-rich VLDL particles in the systemic circulation stimulate CE-transfer protein to transfer TGs from VLDL to HDL particles in exchange for CEs [26], producing TG-rich HDL particles that are smaller and more prone to elimination by the kidneys, thus lowering the circulating pool of HDL particles, an effect that may compromise removal of atherogenic cholesterol from the circulation (i.e., via HDL-mediated reverse cholesterol transport) [27]. Finally, VF-released proinflammatory crytokines (e.g., interleukin \(\delta\)) stimulate liver synthesis and release of inflammatory molecules, such as C-reactive protein and GlycA, promoting inflammation and atherogenesis in the systemic circulation, among others [28]. Thus, VF appears to be closely related to hepatic insulin resistance and related glucose and lipid abnormalities, as well as systemic inflammation; these processes in turn are the key pathological processes of T2D and atherosclerotic vascular disease, such as MI.

**Many of the VF-associated metabolic variations were significantly different between the two age groups**. The BMI or SF-adjusted VF associations with higher TG-rich VLDL particles and inflammation were present in both generations, but the effect estimates were significantly larger in adults than in adolescents (Fig. 1b). Further, in the BMI or SF-adjusted models, VF associations with higher glucose and intermediary metabolites and BCAAs remained significant in adults only with significant metabolite-by-age group interactions. A probable factor contributing to these age group-specific metabolic associations of VF may be the presence of fatty liver: VF accumulation is closely correlated with fatty liver [29] and fatty liver is a key modulator of levels of these metabolites [30, 31]. Importantly, the prevalence of fatty liver increases with age, affecting an estimated \(\sim\)13% of adolescents aged 12-17 years [32] and \(\sim\)46% of working-age adults [33]. Other theoretical contributors to the age group differences include the longer exposure to the adverse secretory effects of VF in adults than in adolescents (due to older age), which may lead to more severe health consequences of obesity [34], or the differences in the biology of VF expansion, which involve mostly adipocyte hypertrophy in adults and adipocyte proliferation in adolescents (larger adipocytes exhibit more adverse secretary profile [35]). Lastly, VF was associated with higher levels of cholesterol-rich IDL and LDL particles in adolescents but not in adults. While this difference may be at least partially due to the larger sample size in adolescents than in adults, biological factors --such as growth hormone, which peaks in adolescence [36], is inhibited by higher adiposity [37], and modulates the number of LDL receptors [38]--may play a role. As IDL and LDL particles are atherogenic [39], excess VF may promote atherosclerosis already in youth [2]. Consistently, children and adolescents with a genetic growth hormone deficiency have higher levels of LDL-cholesterol, higher thickness of the carotid intima media, and higher mortality rates from cardiovascular disease [40]. Of note, we did not find significant sex differences in either age group (Figs. S7 and S8).

**Similar metabolic pathways may be involved in VF, T2D, and MI, but less so in IS**. We found that, in both generations, the

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l l l l} \multicolumn{1}{l}{**Characteristic**} & \multicolumn{1}{l}{**Adolescents**} & \multicolumn{1}{l}{**Adults**} & \multicolumn{1}{l}{**_Pelitrevance_**} \\  & **(\(\bm{n}=938\))** & **(\(\bm{n}=507\))** & \\ \hline Male, \% & 47.5 & 44.6 & 0.3 \\ Age, years & 14.6 \(\pm\) 1.8 & 49.0 \(\pm\) 4.8 & \(p\)\(<\) 2e\(-\) 308 \\ Height, cm & 163.2 \(\pm\) 9.6 & 167.1 \(\pm\) 8.5 & 6.8e\(-\) 24 \\ Weight, kg & 58.7 \(\pm\) 1.5 & 78.1 \(\pm\) 16.7 & 5.4e\(-\) 110 \\ BMI, kg/m\({}^{2}\) & 21.8 \(\pm\) 4.5 & 27.9 \(\pm\) 5.4 & 1.4e\(-\) 114 \\ Overweight or & 28.1 & 68.2 & 7.7e\(-\) 49 \\ obese, \% & & & \\ Viscareal Fat, cm\({}^{3}\) & 22.1 \(\pm\) 19.1 & 83.0 \(\pm\) 60.3 & 4.4e\(-\) 159 \\ Subtuctaneous fat, & 126.1 \(\pm\) 102.0 & 283.9 \(\pm\) 148.3 & 2.7e\(-\) 130 \\ cm\({}^{3}\) & & & \\ Total TG, mmol/1 & 0.9 \(\pm\) 0.4 & 1.4 \(\pm\) 0.7 & 3.0e\(-\) 57 \\ LDL-C, mmol/1 & 1.2 \(\pm\) 0.4 & 1.6 \(\pm\) 0.5 & 1.9e\(-\) 79 \\ HDL-C, mmol/1 & 1.3 \(\pm\) 0.3 & 1.4 \(\pm\) 0.4 & 5.7e\(-\) 4 \\ Glucose, mmol/1 & 3.6 \(\pm\) 0.3 & 4.1 \(\pm\) 0.8 & 3.9e\(-\) 112 \\ \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: Basic characteristics of studied participants.

 above-described BMI-adjusted metabolomic profile of VF was highly similar to those of T2D (adults: \(R^{2}=0.88\); adolescents: \(R^{2}=0.70\)) and MI (adults: \(R^{2}=0.59\); adolescents: \(R^{2}=0.40\)) (Figs. 2 and S9). Results obtained in a sensitivity analysis using a subset of 15 noncorrelated metabolomic measures provided similar results (Fig. S10). Our results are consistent with a large-scale genetic study suggesting that higher VF is causally related to T2D and MI in adults [41]. Previous literature also suggests that metabolic changes typically precede the diagnosis of CMD [42] and fatty liver [31]; our findings provide evidence that the CMD-related metabolic changes may start already at a very young age, as the metabolic signature associated with CMD in adulthood can be detected in adolescents with higher VF (Fig. 2). Further, we discovered that the BMI-adjusted metabolomic profile of VF showed lower similarity with the metabolomic profile of IS compared with MI (adults: \(R^{2}=0.05\); adolescents: \(R^{2}=0.08\)). The specific reasons are not clear. Nevertheless, atherosclerosis of intracranial vs. coronary arteries exhibits several differences, some of which include lower lipid infiltration and higher fibrosis [43]. In this context, it is of note that the major differences between the metabolic profiles of IS and VF (and not between the profiles of MI and VF profile) were (1) a weaker negative association of IS with cholesterol content in the larger HDL subfractions, and (2) stronger positive associations of IS with polyunsaturated-FA-to-total-FA ratios and acetoacetate, a breakdown product of FAs. The latter is interesting, as elevated circulating polyunsaturatedFAs have recently been causally related to aortic stenosis [44], which is a progressive fibrotic disease of aortic valves.

**VF explains a sizable proportion of variance in metabolomic measures**. For example, isoleucine is a BCAA demonstrating one of the largest effect sizes in adults but not adolescents: in adults, VF explained 23%, 13%, and 17% of variance in the isoleucine level in the basic, BMI- and SF-adjusted models, respectively, whereas, in adolescents, the corresponding variances explained were 6%, 1%, and 2%. In comparison, age explained only 2% of variance in isoleucine levels in all three models in adults and 0% variance in all three models in adolescents. The inflammatory

Fig. 2: **Correlation of the body mass index (BMI)-adjusted metabolomic profile of visceral fat with the BMI-adjusted metabolomic profiles of type 2 diabetes, myocardial infarction and ischemic stroke in adults and adolescents.** Effect estimates of the metabolomic associations of type 2 diabetes, myocardial infarction, and ischemic stroke were extracted from open-access studies that employed the same nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)-based metabolomics platform we used here [6, 7]. The correlations are plotted using 87 metabolomic measures publicly available in all three studies. The study-specific effect sizes are scaled with respect to the effect size on very-low density triglyceride (VLDL-TG) concentration to facilitate comparison of effect sizes originating from different study settings. Circles in dark blue indicate the metabolomic measures that showed significantly different effects of VF vs. type 2 diabetes, myocardial infarction, or ischemic stroke, and the shaded area shows the 95% confidence interval for the line indicating the linear fit between the metabolomic profiles. Accete, ACAcce, ACAcce, Alea alanine, Abb albumin, ApoA1 apolipoprotein A-I ApoA8 apolipoprotein B, ApoA1 ratio of ApoA1 to ApoA1, Cit Citrate, Craca creatinine, GlyA-glycoprotein activity, His histidine, Ie isoleucine, IA Inoleic acid, Leu leucine, Phe phenylalanine, FAw3 omega-3 fatty acids, FAw6 omega-6 fatty acids, and, for fatty acids, abbreviations ending \(\sigma\)-FA’ indicate fatty acid proportions relative to total fatty acids. The 14 lipoprotein subfractions are 6 very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL), 1 intermediate-density lipoprotein (LDL), 3 low-density lipoprotein (LDL), and 4 high-density lipoprotein (HDL) subfractions. The lipoproteins are sorted by size from extra-extra-large (XXL) to extra-large (XL), large (L), medium (M), small (S) and extra-small (XS). For lipoprotein particles, P particle concentration and D particle size.

 marker GlycA demonstrated one of the largest effect sizes in both adults and adolescents: in adults, VF explained 22%, 12%, and 11% of variance in GlycA levels in the basic, BMI- and SF-adjusted models, respectively, and, in adolescents, the respective values were 17%, 6%, and 1%. In comparison, age explained only 2% of variance in GlycA levels in all three models and in both adults and adolescents.

**Strengths and limitations.** Unlike previous studies, we measured body adiposity directly with MRI and, therefore, could also assess associations of VF independently of SF. This is important, as VF more than other fat in the body increases risk for CMD\({}^{\lx@sectionsign}\). VF can only be measured with MRI or computerized tomography; other methods only estimate VF indirectly (e.g., dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry)\({}^{\lx@sectionsign}\). Further, unlike previous studies, we analyzed data from two generations, thus providing a broader lifespan perspective to the VF-associated metabolic aberrations. Our study, however, is observational and as such cannot make causal conclusions. Also, it would be highly beneficial to assess the impact of fatty liver in these associations; this was not possible in this report due to the lack of relevant data. Given that we studied here adults and adolescents from a single population, replication of our findings in other populations and ethnicities would be of high value.

## Conclusions

In conclusion, this is the first study to investigate associations of MRI-quantified VF with circulating metabolomic measures in two generations--adolescents and their middle-aged parents. In both generations, VF accumulation was associated with major aberrations in TG and FA metabolism and systemic inflammation. In adults only, VF accumulation was additionally associated with major aberrations of glucose and amino acid metabolism. Most of these associations remained after adjusting for BMI or SF, which indicates that visceral adiposity independent of general adiposity may be detrimental for cardiometabolic health. Consistently, the BMI-adjusted metabolomic profile of VF is closely associated with the metabolomic aberrations increasing risk for T2D and ischemic heart disease not only in adults but also in adolescents.

## Data availability

To protect the privacy of the Sapenny Youth Study participants, individual level data are stored on a private server and only available upon request from the Sapenny Youth Study (zdenka.pansuros@skidk.ca). All summary statistics are available within the related Supplementary files. Source data for the figures can be found in Supplementary Data 2-4. The previously published metabolomic association profiles of carbonetubolic diseases are available within the Supplementary Materials of the papers by Abiba-Olli et al. and Holmes et al.

## Code availability

All analyses were conducted using R libraries described in Methods and, thus, this paper does not report original code. The exact R commands used are available upon request.

Received: 20 November 2021; Accepted: 10 June 2022; Published online: 01 July 2022

## References

* [1] GBD 2016 Causes of Death Collaborators. Global, regional, and national aggressive specific mortality for 264 causes of death, 1980-2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016. _Lancet_**390**, 1151-1210 (2017).
* [2] Berenson, G. S. et al. Association between multiple cardiovascular risk factors and atherosclerosis in children and young adults. The Bogalusa Heart Study, N. Engl J. Med.**338**, 1650-1656 (1998).
* [3] Powell-Wiley, T. M. et al. Obesity and cardiovascular disease: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. _Circulation_**143**, e984-+1010 (2021).
* [4] Wurtz, P. et al. Metabolic signatures of adiposity in young adults: Mendelian randomization analysis and effects of weight change. _PLoS Med._**11**, e1001765 (2014).
* [5] Wurtz, P. et al. Metabolite profiling and cardiovascular event risk: a prospective study of 3 population-based cohorts. _Circulation_**131**, 774-785 (2015).
* [6] Abiba-Olli, A. V. et al. Circulating metabolites and the risk of type 2 diabetes: a prospective study of 11.896 young adults from four Finnish cohorts. _Dabetologia_**62**, 2298-2309 (2019).
* [7] Holmes, M. V. et al. Lipids lipoproteins, and metabolites and risk of myocardial infarction and stroke. _J. Am. Coll. Cardiol._**71**, 620-632 (2018).
* [8] Nedalm, J. et al. visceral and ectopic fat, atherosclerosis, and cardiometabolic disease: a position statement. _Lancet Diabetes Enderciol._**7**, 715-725 (2019).
* [9] Syme, C. et al. Intra-abdominal adiposity and individual components of the metabolic syndrome in adolescence: sex differences and underlying mechanisms. _Arch. Pediatr. Adoles. Med._**162**, 453-461 (2008).
* [10] Neeland, I. J. et al. Metabolomics profiling of visceral adipose tissue: results from MES and the NCR study. _Am. Heart Assoc._**8**, e010810 (2019).
* [11] Tchernd, A. & Despres, J. P. Pathophysiology of human visceral obesity: an update. _Physica Rev._**93**, 359-494 (2013).
* [12] Palmisano, B. T., Zhu, L., Eckel, R. H. & Stafford, J. M. Sex differences in lipid and lipoprotein metabolism. _Mol. Metab._**15**, 45-55 (2018).
* [13] Markus, M. R. P. et al. Association of sex-specific differences in lipoprotein(a) concentrations with cardiovascular mortality in individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus. _Cardiovascular Diabetl._**20**, 168 (2021).
* [14] Paustora, Z. et al. Cohort profile. the Sapenny Youth Study (SYS). _Int. J. Epidemiol._**46**, e19 (2017).
* [15] Soininen, P., Kangas, A. J., Wurtz, P., Suna, T. & Ala-Korpela, M. Quantitative serum nuclear magnetic resonance metabolites in cardiovascular epidemiology and genetics. _Circ. Cardiowiaet. Genet._**8**, 192-206 (2015).
* [16] Wurtz, P. et al. Quantitative serum nuclear magnetic resonance metabolomics in large-scale epidemiology: a primer on- omit technologies. _Am. J. Epidemiol._**186**, 1084-1096 (2017).
* [17] Chien, L. C. A rank-based normalization method with the fully adjusted full-stage procedure in genetic association studies. _PLoS ONE_**15**, e0233847 (2020).
* [18] Bates, D., Michler, M., Bolker, B. & Walker, S. Fitting linear mixed-effects models using lane. _J. Stat. Softw._**67**, 1-48 (2015).
* [19] Siz, E. et al. A variant near DICRE4 associates with microstructural properties of white matter and peripheral lipid metabolism in adolescents. _Mod. Psychiatry_**26**, 3795-3805 (2021).
* [20] Statistics Canada, Table 13-10-0545-01. Measured adult body mass index (BMI) (World Health Organization classification), by age group and sex, Canada and provinces. https://doi.org/10.2531/81310045601-eng.
* Nutrition. https://doi.org/10.2531/81310097501-eng.
* [22] Ell, S. et al. Metabolomics: population epidemiology and concordance in Australian children aged 11-12 years and their parents. _BMJ Open_**9**, 106-117 (2019).
* [23] Perry, R. J., Samuel, V. T., Petersen, K. F. & Shulman, G. I. The role of hepatic lipids in hepatic insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes. _Nature_**510**, 84-91 (2014).
* [24] Weisberg, S. P. et al. Obesity is associated with macrophage accumulation in adipose tissue. _J. Clin. Invest._**112**, 1796-1808 (2003).
* [25] Lewis, G. F. & Steiner, G. Acute effects of insulin in the control of VLDL production in humans. Implications for the insulin-resistant state. _Diabetes Care_**19**, 390-393 (1996).
* [26] Barter, P. J. et al. Cholesterol ester transfer protein: a novel target for raising HDL and inhibiting atherosclerosis. _Arteiosclerr. Thromb. Vasc. Biol._**23**, 160-167 (2017).
* [27] Ouinter, M., Barrett, T. J. & Fisher, E. A. HDL and reverse cholesterol transport. _Circ. Res._**124**, 1505-1518 (2019).
* [28] Ridker, P. M. Inflammation, C.reactive protein, and cardiovascular disease moving past the marker versus mediator debate. _Circ. Res._**114**, 594-595 (2014).
* [29] Eguchi, V. et al. visceral fat accumulation and insulin resistance are important factors in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. _J. Gastroenterr._**41**, 462-469 (2006).
* [30] Siz, E. et al. NAFLD risk alleles in DNPLA3, TM6SF2, GCKK and LYPLAL3 show divergent metabolic effects. _Hum. Med. Genet._**27**, 2214-2223 (2018).
* [31] Kakikonen, J. E. et al. Metabolic profiling of fatty liver in young and middle-aged adults: cross-sectional and prospective analyses of the Young Finus Study. _Heptology_**65**, 491-500 (2017).
* [32] Anhad, T. et al. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease prevalence trends among adolescents and young adults in the United States, 2007-2016. _Heptol. Commun._**5**, 1676-1688 (2021).

 * [33] Williams, C. D. et al. Prevalence of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis among a largely middle-aged population utilizing ultrasound and liver biopsy: a prospective study. _Gastroenterology_**140**, 124-131 (2011).
* [34] Norris, T. et al. Duration of obesity exposure between ages 10 and 40 years and its relationship with cardiometabolic disease risk factors: a cohort study. _PLoS Med._**17**, e0103387 (2020).
* [35] Ghaben, A. L. & Scherer, P. E. Adipogenesis and metabolic health. _Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol._**20**, 242-258 (2019).
* [36] Finkelstein, J. W., Wolfgang, H. P., Boyar, R. M., Kream, J. & Hellman, L. Age-related change in the twenty-four-bour spontaneous secretion of growth hormone. _J. Clin. Enderl. Med._**38**, 665-670 (1972).
* [37] Yang, A. et al. Impact of BMI on peak growth hormone responses to provective tests and therapeutic outcome in children with growth hormone deficiency. _Sci. Rep._**9**, 16181 (2019).
* [38] Rudling, M. et al. Importance of growth hormone for the induction of hepatic low density lipoprotein receptors. _Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA_**89**, 6983-6987 (1992).
* [39] Ference, B. A. et al. Low-density lipoproteins cause atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. I: Evidence from genetic, epidemiologic, and clinical studies. A consensus statement from the European Atherosclerosis Society Consensus Panel. _Eur. Heart J._**38**, 2459-2472 (2017).
* [40] Chen, M. et al. Effect of recombinant human growth hormone therapy on blood lipid and carotid intima-media thickness in children with growth hormone deficiency. _Poliatr. Res._**83**, 954-960 (2018).
* [41] Karlsson, T. et al. Contribution of genetics to visceral adiposity and its relation to cardiovascular and metabolic disease. _Nat. Med._**25**, 1390-1395 (2019).
* [42] Wilson, P. W., D'Agostino, R. B., Parise, H., Sullivan, L. & Meigs, J. B. Metabolic syndrome as a precursor of cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes mellitus. _Circadian_**112**, 3066-3072 (2005).
* [43] Banerjee, C. & Chinowitz, M. I. Stroke caused by atherosclerosis of the major intracranial arteries. _Cir. Res._**120**, 502-513 (2017).
* [44] Chen, H. Y. et al. Association of FACS/2-1 locus variants and polyunsaturated fatty acids with aortic stenosis. _JAMA Cardiol._**5**, 694-702 (2020).

## Acknowledgements

We thank all participants of the Sagwang Youth Study. The Sagwang Youth Study has been funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Heart and Stroke Foundation of Canada, Canadian Foundation for Innovation, and National Institutes of Health, Z.P. is the study guarantor.

## Author contributions

J.R. and E.S. researched data and wrote the original manuscript. E.S. and Z.P. conceptualized the study. Z.P. supervised the study and middle the manuscript. J.S., T.P., and Z.P. managed the STS cohort and data. M.Y.H., G.B.P., L.R., G.T.P., and Z.P. obtained funding andror provided additional study resources. All authors contributed to revising the content and approved the final version.

## Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

## Additional information

### Supplementary information

The online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi.org/10.1038/43856-022-00140-5.

### Correspondence

and requests for materials should be addressed to Zdenka Pausova.

### Peer review information Communications Medicine

thanks Michael D Shapiro, Ignasi Rubka and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.

### Reprints and permission information

is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints

### Publisher's note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

[] Open AccessThis article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creat/recommons.orglicenses/br/4.0/.

 