

# Accounting for EBM: Notions of evidence in medicine

Helen Lambert

h.lambert@bristol.ac.uk Department of Social Medicine, University of Bristol, Canyneg Hall, Whiteladies Road, Bristol BS8 2PY, UK

###### Abstract

This paper takes as a focus of anthropological enquiry the set of techniques and practices for the appraisal and clinical application of research evidence that has become known as evidence-based medicine (EBM) (or, more recently, evidence-based health care). It first delineates and classifies the criticisms of EBM emerging from within the health professions. It then charts the evolution of EBM in responding to these criticisms and uncovers its character as a pedagogical innovation aimed at transforming clinical practice. It identifies EBM as an indeterminate and malleable range of techniques and practices characterised not by particular kinds of methodological rigour, but by the pursuit of a new approach to medical knowledge and authority. It situates this characterisation within a contemporaneous political and economic climate of declining trust and growing accountability. This analysis provides a basis from which to consider the notions of evidence implicit in EBM itself and also in the qualitative social sciences, including anthropology, which not only critique but also contribute to these notions themselves. Finally, the paper considers possible future trajectories for EBM with regard to the incorporation of cultural and structural dimensions of health and the inclusion of qualitative material in the evidence base.

Evidence; Evidence-based medicine; Anthropology; Narrative-based medicine; Methodology; Qualitative research +
Footnote †: journal: Medical Medicine

1
Footnote 1: Tel.: +44 117928 7332; fax: +44 117928 7236.

## Introduction: A pedagogical and autobiographical trajectory

My personal impetus for beginning to think and write about notions of evidence has been my dual institutional position in two academic departments of public health since 1991 as both observer of the rise of evidence-based medicine and as participant, required (as is usual in multidisciplinary environments) to defend and promote ethnographic and other qualitative approaches to research. Here, I gloss 'evidence-based medicine' (henceforth EBM) loosely as referring to the demand that clinical practice and, increasingly, all health policy and practice (and indeed other areas of social policy) be based on systematically reviewed and critically appraised evidence of effectiveness. The package of quantitative techniques and procedures currently known as EBM is generally agreed to have been founded by a group of colleagues at McMaster University in the mid-1980s. '_Clinical epidemiology_' (Sackett, Haynes, Guyatt, & Tugwell, 1985) was the first volume to announce the arrival of a new approach to clinical medicine by showing that epidemiology (until then a discipline associated largely with population health) could be applied to individual patient care. For social scientists of an interpretative bent who can (and often all too readily do) mock with great fluency the naive positivist tendencies of biomedical science, it is salutary to begin by recalling that well before 1985when that volume was first published, there were good reasons for EBM's proponents to attempt to shift medical practice towards a more 'science-based' approach. I refer to the increasing recognition, probably from the 1960s onwards, within and outside the profession that doctors are not infallible and that many medical interventions have historically been based on tradition or preference, unsupported by any evidence of benefit other than the conviction of the administering practitioner.

### Critiques of EBM: A typology of alleged limitations

While what 'EBM' is continues to be negotiated and broadened--a point central to the argument of this paper--the limitations rather than the benefits of EBM have been the subject of fervent and often polemical debate in the pages of many health practitioners' journals. Many mainstream medical journals have published articles on the topic, while the Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice has emerged as a major site for critique with an annual thematic issue on the EBM debate. I undertook a search of medical and public health journals for letters, articles and commentaries written in English since 1990 that comment (favourably or unfavourably) on EBM.1 All identified literature was reviewed and those items that critiqued EBM in any fashion were categorised manually into thematic groups, as discussed below; the next section of the paper discusses responses to these critiques from EBM advocates. My review did not seek to be comprehensive, but rather to capture the range of critiques that have been made of EBM during its ascendancy and to identify responses to them. This review--arguably less 'systematic' than the partially quantitative review methods recommended within EBM, but nonetheless fairly rigorous--suggests that critical responses to EBM, from the first declarations of a 'paradigm shift' in medical practice (Evidence-Based Medicine Working Group, 1992) to date can broadly be categorised into the following six groups (see Table 1).

Footnote 1: My search initially produced roughly 35 cited references (limited to those sources available free online or at Bristol University and restricted to relatively non-specialised medical and health professional publications; thus commentaries on aspects of EBM appearing in journals directed at, for example, audiences of gerontologists or occupational health workers, were accessed only where they could be traced from initial citations in more mainstream sources.). I conducted further searches during revision of this paper to verify the initially derived categories; Web of Science (which provides citation counts), yielded 333 initial references on 'EBM' AND 'crit*' OR 'limit*', reduced to 51 references after title and abstract review. The Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice yielded over 200 references on these keywords. Abstract and where necessary content review confirmed the veracity of my typology, but suggested a possible nascent sixth category concerning ethics that is referred to in the concluding section.

### Incommensurability of population evidence and individual patient needs

First (1 in Table 1), there are the difficulties that can be characterised as arising out of the individual-population discrepancy. Many clinicians have argued--and many epidemiologists and medical statisticians, their general support for the entrenchment of EBM in clinical practice notwithstanding, have agreed (Davey-Smith & Egger, 1998)--that evidence deriving from randomised controlled trials and other studies of the effects of interventions in populations cannot straightforwardly be 'read across' to the clinical management of individual patients (Parker, 2002; Schattner & Fletcher, 2003; Sullivan & Macnaughton, 1996). Underlying this difficulty in translation is the notion that these forms of knowledge are essentially incommensurate.

### Bias towards individualised interventions

A further criticism (2 in Table 1) which derives from this same issue but holds potentially problematic implications for public health rather than clinical practice, concerns the constraining effect that EBM may have on what types of intervention are considered legitimate. Briefly, this criticism alleges the following: that since what is most readily measurable through evidence-based approaches are direct comparisons between simple treatments such as a single drug against a placebo, assessments such as the classical clinical trial are increasingly

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l l} \hline
1 & Incommensurate nature of population evidence and individual patient profiles \\
2 & Bias towards individualised interventions \\
3 & Exclusion of clinical skills from medical practice \\
4 & Production of formulaic guidelines \\
5 & Failure to consider patient views and narratives \\
6 & Difficulties in disseminating \& implementing evidence into practice \\ \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 1: Limitations of EBM identified in critical literature favoured. Meanwhile the growing requirement to provide evidence of effectiveness before implementing interventions means that complex interventions are by default less and less likely to be supported over time. Hence behavioural, psychosocial, community-based and multiple-component interventions lose out in favour of individual patient-based treatments (Dieppe, 1998; Tallon, Chard, & Dieppe, 2000) and resultant public health policy-setting increasingly focuses on individuals rather than on groups (Davey-Smith, Ebrahim, & Frankel, 2002). I return to the issue of the individualised focus of EBM later in the paper.

### Exclusion of clinical skills

A third set of critiques (3 in Table 1) focus directly on the putative exclusion from the concept of EBM of what has been variously characterised as the 'diagnostic art', 'clinical expertise' or 'clinical judgement'--in other words, the experientially acquired craft skills of clinical practice. This group of critiques focuses most squarely on the hoary 'art vs. science' debate (cf. Gordon, 1988) in the characterisation of clinical medicine. Some early responses in this vein suggested that EBM is a spurious exercise in attempting to codify and regulate what is already intuitively or otherwise 'known' and practised by clinicians and that, essentially, medicine has long been evidence based. Others have contended that EBM seeks to reduce clinicians to reading automata by stripping patient care of clinical skills in favour of the strict application of scientific knowledge (Williams & Garner, 2002).

### Production of formulaic guidelines

A subdivision of the above type of response that is profuse and distinct enough to warrant separate identification (as 4 in Table 1) relates specifically to the formulation and application of formulaic procedures ('clinical guidelines', 'protocols' or 'algorithms') to guide clinical practice (Kassirer, 1993). Critiques of this process (mostly from within the medical profession) have mainly focused on the potential erosion of clinical autonomy represented by these formulae (for example Rappolt, 1997; but see Denny, 1999). Attention has also been paid to implicit assumptions about knowledge acquisition that underlie the production of such guidelines and the consequent implications for physicians' learning--and hence the quality of patient care (Berg, Horstman, Plass, & Van Heusden, 2000; Smith, Goodwin, Mort, & Pope, 2003). Others have examined the production of clinical guidelines and have argued that they limit, rather than advance, patient choice (Rogers, 2002) or that, far from ensuring universal standardisation, in reality such formulae are subject to processes of local adaptation (Timmermans & Berg, 1997).

### Failure to consider patient views

Contributors to the group of critiques labelled 5 in Table 1 are concerned with the 'voice' of the patient; with patient autonomy and levels of satisfaction in the care patients receive. A prominent argument in these contributions is the putative danger that EBM, in relying solely on a strict hierarchy of acceptable forms of evidence, prioritises evidence of clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness and excludes subjective perceptions, including those of the potential or actual recipients of care (Richards, 1997). Obviously this group of critiques overlaps partially with the third category described above in arguing, for example, for the importance of patient narrative and subjective judgement in clinical practice (and hence that clinical medicine is inherently interpretative) (Greenhalgh, 1999; Greenhalgh & Hurwitz, 1999).

### Difficulties in translating evidence into practice

Chronologically, the final group of critical responses to EBM (6 in Table 1) has expanded as those of the fifth category just described have gradually subsided under the weight of EBM's growing orthodoxy. This final type of response, distinctively, is produced as often by proponents as by critics of EBM and does not seek to question the status or value of evidence production and collection itself. Most contributions focus on the problem of introducing, disseminating, and implementing evidence (that is, research findings) in clinical practice (Maeseneer, Van Driel, Green, & Van Weel, 2003), though some have argued that EBM-oriented attempts to improve practice are based on an overly simplistic concept of behavioural change (Grol & Grimshaw, 2003; Haines & Donald, 1998; Wood, Ferlie, & Fitzgerald, 1998). This group of critiques includes systematic reviews of studies that attempt to gather evidence regarding the implementation of research evidence in practice. Finally, a growing number of publications focus on the use of evidence not in clinical practice but in health policy and health services delivery (Dobrow, Goel, & Upshur, 2004; Niessen, Grijseels, & Rutten, 2000).

### Encompassing objections: The evolution of EBM

The previous section provided a brief orientation to major categories of criticism levelled at EBM. As each type of putative limitation has been identified in commentaries and papers, each has progressively been accommodated within the parameters of EBM itself. My review of the literature suggests that criticism has characteristically been countered not by rejection, contestation or entrenchment, but by incorporation. This assimilationist response is fairly characteristic of the way in which biomedicine, as an institutionally dominant system, has dealt in many country contexts with other (traditional, indigenous and alternative) medical traditions. A current example is the growing trend to apply EBM principles to complementary and alternative medical traditions (Haynes, 1999; Villanueva-Russell, 2004; Wilson & Mills, 2002), facilitating the selective incorporation of appropriately validated alternative traditions into biomedicine's organisational health care delivery system. The take-up of evidence-based approaches by various traditions of complementary medicine simultaneously bears testimony to its growing value as a legitimating strategy.

Section 1 illustrate incorporation as a characteristic reaction to criticism of EBM using a single response to each identified category of limitation. Thus, regarding the incommensurability of individual and population-based forms of evidence (type 1 limitation), the founders of EBM have argued that these forms of evidence were never meant to be alternatives. In the second edition to their textbook _Clinical Epidemiology_Sackett et al. (1991) describe their eponymous subject as the 'science of the art of medicine' (1991, p. xiv) and, noting the need to integrate it with the other basic sciences, they comment that, 'were the approaches presented here to constitute the sole scientific basis for clinical action, we would simply be substituting a new tyranny of unachievable methodologic rigor for the old tyranny of unteachable clinical art.' (1991, pp. xiv-xv). This response nominally also addresses the type of criticism categorised as 2 in Table 1, that EBM biases the selection of interventions towards simple individual treatments, though in practice its assimilation has not been directly asserted. It is, however, dealt with indirectly by other members of the EBM Working Group in an attempt to encompass broader social structural dimensions of health, considered in the final section of this paper.

Assimilationist response to the third type of limitation, the supposed exclusion of clinical judgement and the interpretive art of medicine from EBM, has been voiced extensively in published editorials and articles. It is most succinctly expressed through the reformulation of a diagram that was published initially in editorials in both ACP Journal Club and EBM in 1996, with a text that also appeared in the British Medical Journal (Sackett, Haynes, Guyatt, & Tugwell, 1996). This venn diagram depicts three interlocking circles, termed 'Research evidence', 'Clinical expertise', and 'Patient preferences' (Fig. 1).

A revised version of the diagram (Fig. 2) was published in 2002 in _ACP Journal_ Club and in abbreviated form 3 months later by the _BMJ_, with another extended version in _EBM_ the following year (Haynes, Devereaux, & Guyatt, 2003).

This version (Haynes, Devereaux, & Guyatt, 2002) overlays the intersecting area between the same three circles with a dotted ovoid entitled 'Clinical expertise', while the circle previously given this name is renamed 'Clinical state and circumstances' and the circle to the lower left is referentially expanded by tagging it 'Patients' preferences and actions'. Thus the combination of interpretive art and clinical experience is repositioned to a central position in the representation of EBM,

Figure 1: Early model of the key elements for evidence-based clinical decisions.

 visually overlying all the other elements of the triad. This repositioning definitively accommodates the complaints of those professionals who considered their medical judgement impugned by its initial demotion to a third of the clinical process, occupying equal status with 'patients preferences' and 'research evidence'. Tellingly however, in this reformulation the sole element left untouched is the circle named 'Research evidence', while the apparent restoration of clinical expertise to a central position is limited or, perhaps, even rendered optional by the dashed rather than solid line used to indicate its compass.

The subgroup of critiques concerned with the constraining of professional autonomy and disregard of clinical skill via the imposition of standardised protocols and guidelines (type 4 in Table 1) was confronted by Sackett et al. in a widely cited editorial published in the BMJ (Sackett et al., 1996). This response characterises such formulaic approaches as 'cookbook medicine' and continues, 'Because it requires a bottom up approach that integrates the best external evidence with individual clinical expertise and patients' choice, [EBM] cannot result in slavish, cookbook approaches, etc. Clinicians who fear top down cookbooks will find the advocates of evidence based medicine joining them at the barricades' (1996, p. 71). Such a response in effect counters the argument that EBM constrains professional autonomy and disregards clinical skill by arguing that such criticism arises, like limitation type 1, from an overly narrow misconstrual of EBM. Like the response to 1, the statement cited here can best be seen as an effective rhetorical strategy that disarms the beleaguered ranks of medical professionals by a sturdy expression of solidarity. In reality, the establishment of clinical protocols to enforce 'best practice' is undoubtedly one manifestation of EBM (take for example the establishment of the UK's National Institution of Clinical Excellence (NICE), one of whose three core stated activities is 'Developing clinical guidelines' (NICE, 2004)).

A particularly strong focus in the past decade's ongoing debate about EBM has been the patient's role in clinical decision-making--my fifth category of limitation (Schattner & Fletcher, 2003). Again this limitation is dealt with by encompassing it. Although 'patient choice' was included in the earliest EBM model, as described above (Fig. 1), a widely quoted definition of EBM taken from the 1996 editorial cited above nowhere mentions patient preference. EBM was there defined (in a widely quoted phrase) as, 'The conscientious, explicit, and judicious use of current best evidence in making decisions about the care of individual patients' (Sackett et al., 1996, p. 71). The revised version of the EBM diagram (Fig. 2) however places greater emphasis than the original on the patient as active agent in--rather than passive recipient of--evidence-based practice. More generally, 'evidence-based patient choice', which combines EBM and patient centred care (Edwards & Elwyn, 2001; Hope, 2002) and emphasises the need to communicate research evidence to patients to assist their informed decision-making, has become an important area of development in health care research and clinical practice.

Due to the inherently pro-EBM character of the sixth category in my typology, acknowledgement of dissemination difficulties in the production and use of new medical evidence takes the form of treating this issue increasingly within the framework of EBM itself. An example is a three-part series in the high-impact journal _Lancet_ on 'Research into Practice', the first paper of which is entitled 'From best evidence to best practice: effective implementation of change in patients' care' (Grol & Grimshaw, 2003). A current concern in the promotion of evidence-based practice is clinicians' reading activities, with new initiatives for disseminating the latest 'best evidence' becoming the focus of particularly active research efforts (Mykhalovskiy, 2003). In effect, the rectitude of EBM is increasingly being taken as a given; criticisms have been assimilated through corrections to the original formulation and

Fig. 2: Updated model for evidence-based clinical decisions.

 emphasis is shifting to methods for facilitating its effective practice.

Having demonstrated how EBM has evolved in response to different types of criticism, the next section turns to consider the foundations of EBM in clinical training. Situating EBM in medical historical perspective helps to shed some light on its remarkable ability to accommodate criticism and the speed of its incorporation into normative clinical practice.

## Models of and models for medical practice: education and revolution

The rise and rise of EBM in the UK, as elsewhere, can be seen perhaps most clearly in its gradual entrenchment within the medical curriculum (Demar, Glasziou, & Mayer, 2004; Sinclair, 2004; Straus & Jones, 2004). A study of UK medical schools in 2001 found that most include critical appraisal in the curriculum and examinations for postgraduate training (Alderson, Gliddon & Chalmers, 2003), while a 1998 survey of the UK medical Royal Colleges (which licence clinicians to practice at consultant level in their specialist areas) found that two-thirds examined skills in 'EBM' (Leung & Whitty, 2000). Medical students at Bristol, for example, now have to complete EBM modules within their public health training and EBM is a 'vertical theme' throughout the undergraduate degree. Trainees undergoing their hospital-based residency attend weekly meetings aimed at reviewing the evidence for selected clinical problems as a means of developing literature searching and critical appraisal skills. Far from being an incidental indicator of EBM's success, the pedagogical dimension is central to the EBM initiative as conceived by its founders and I turn now to the meaning and implications of this.

Berg (1995) provides a fascinating account of postwar biomedicine in the US, analysing the turns by which clinical practice came to be redrawn as a science (rather than, as previously, an art that draws on science in its practice). He demonstrates how particular characterisations of medical practice (for example, the physician as information-processing machine) in turn inevitably lead to the 'discovery' of consequent failures (physicians' information-processing abilities are then investigated and found to be flawed). The successive developments in medical practice addressed by this history include components of what has now come to be known as EBM, such as the use of guidelines or protocols (Berg et al., 2000).

What emerges with particular force from the lines of this argument is the way in which pedagogical models developed _for_ medical practice have repeatedly been reframed as models _of_ medical practice. When applied to practice those models are then found wanting. Effort then becomes focused on attempting to improve practice. To illustrate by way of an example relevant to EBM, the 'hypotheticodeductive method', based on cognitive models of problem-solving, was originally introduced into medicine for use in training medical students in diagnostic decision-making (Berg, 1995; Groen & Patel, 1985). It was subsequently reformulated as a description of what clinicians actually do in practice; and finally, it has been critiqued as an inaccurate representation of what clinicians actually do "do" (Greenhalgh, 1999).

As Sackett et al. make clear in the preface to the second edition of their textbook on clinical epidemiology, while the initial impetus to develop EBM emerged from their own career experiences, it was through involvement in developing a new structure for medical education (at McMaster University) that they found the opportunity to formulate and disseminate the concept. In a 1992 paper that is less often referenced than some of the group's later, more programmatic writings on EBM, they make their intentions perfectly explicit. The second sub-heading of their paper is, 'A paradigm shift' and after summarising Kuhn's characterisation of the same they continue, 'Medical practice is changing and the change, which involves using the medical literature more effectively in guiding medical practice, is profound enough that it can appropriately be called a paradigm shift.' (Evidence-Based Medicine Working Group, 1992). This section goes on to describe 'methodological advances'--use of RCTs to assess drug efficacy, meta-analysis, articles on how to do literature searches, textbooks on clinical epidemiology, evidence dissemination vehicles such as ACP Journal Club and so on--before stating, 'We call this new paradigm "EBM"'. They go on to describe the building of a residency program that aims to inculate EBM and emphasise in some detail how a key feature of the 'new paradigm' is that much lower value is placed on authority than in the older paradigm for medical education.

The authors close the paper with the admirably frank admission that there is little or no evidence that 'EBM' actually improves outcomes for patients. The apparent hubris of proposing a particular educational model while characterising it as a paradigm shift in professional practice nonetheless appears to have been justified. The approach developed at McMaster's had its initial impact in schools of medicine and public health in the guise of a radical pedagogical model described as 'problem-based learning' (an attractive potential solution for those grappling with the problem of an ever-expanding medical curriculum). Just over a decade later, EBM has spread to become if not standard practice, at least a widely entrenched notion in clinical medicine across North America and Europe. Although it remains a contested one, EBM has already become accepted institutionally as a model for practice. One measure of this is the fact that--like the earlier representations of medical practice examined by Berg--concerns are now focusing less on whether EBM is desirable in itself than on barriers to its successful implementation (see my discussion of type 6 critiques above). Proposing a model for practice for pedagogical purposes, which then comes to represent a model of ideal practice to which actual practice must be made to conform, is a well-established trajectory in the history of biomedical ideas.

'EBM' is, moreover, an umbrella term that encompasses a whole gamut of practices, techniques, attitudes and innovations in biomedical science and clinical practice--outcome measurement, the development of algorithms to guide patient care, clinical trial requirements for licensing new drugs, the notion of continuing medical education or 'lifelong learning', software development for diagnostic decision-making, electronic journals, Medline and the innovation of the World Wide Web. Those who coined the term were, in this strict sense, correct to claim it as a paradigm shift--one that was already happening but that was ready to be named and harnessed to a specific set of pedagogical objectives at that historical moment. This judicious rebranding had other positive effects for the promotion of its component approaches, for (unlike 'outcome measurement' or the use of computers by the bedside), who could possibly be against evidence (Carr-Hill, 1995; Dieppe, 1998)? While we now associate EBM with features such as critical appraisal, literature searching, and a focus on efficiency and effectiveness in diagnostic decisions and clinical prescribing, at the core of EBM's early formulation was a concern to downgrade the ultimate authority of the clinical expert in favour of impersonal scientific research evidence (Hampton, 2002, 1983; Norman, 1999). The branding as 'evidence-based' of an essentially social political strategy to unseat professors of medicine as sole arbiters of good practice (Evidence-Based Medicine Working Group, 1992) rather effectively neutralised at the outset resistance from those occupying traditional positions of authority in the medical world. It simultaneously opened a pathway for the relatively young and--to conventional biomedical wisdom--relatively disrespectful fields of epidemiology and public health, to move into a more central position in biomedical education and practice. This 'disrespect' is evident in some of the more light-hearted critiques of EBM that have appeared, such as 'Seven alternatives to EBM' (Isaacs & Fitzgerald, 1999), and 'EBM: Unmasking the ugly truth' (CRAP Writing Group, 2002), an extended spoof which portrays EBM as a fully fledged religious cult.

EBM, then, is an indeterminate and malleable range of techniques and practices unified not--as its proponents and critics alike have tended to assume--by particular kinds of methodological rigour, but by the pursuit of a new approach to medical knowledge and authority. This accounts for the remarkable flexibility in accommodating criticism identified earlier in this paper. The 'catch-all' character of the very term 'EBM' and the ultimate aim of this medical educational strategy, as just described, also help to explain the assimilationist character of EBM's responses to criticism as described in the first sections of this paper. EBM is able to absorb criticisms alleging disparate kinds of shortcomings in its parameters, premises or methods simply by modifying these, since EBM is a rolling programme the precise components and boundaries of which are entirely secondary to its central aims. Before turning to consider the implications of my analysis for what is held to constitute 'evidence' within EBM, I briefly situate the nature of EBM as characterised so far within a broader societal context.

### Accountability and the moral loading of EBM debates

It is beyond the scope of this paper to consider in detail the broader institutional and social environmental structures and historical circumstances within which EBM has been formulated and propagated. However, lest it appear that I am suggesting that EBM's current institutionalisation within several national health systems can be accounted for solely in medical historical terms, it is important briefly to indicate the political and economic dimensions of the EBM critiques discussed above. Clearly, EBM exemplifies, within the particular domain of clinical medicine, the kind of 'audit culture' (Shore & Wright, 1999; Strathern, 2000) that has become characteristic of all State monitored public sector institutions as public trust in authority declines and the perceived need for transparency and accountability increases (a phenomenon discussed by Power, 1997; see Charlton, 1998). The identification of EBM as a pedagogical turn in medical education by no means precludes the possibility of explaining its initial formulation or subsequent success in broader structural terms. On the contrary, the particular concerns of EBM's founders with the unwarranted reliance placed on personal experience and status in the construction of medical authority is entirely consistent with its historical positioning as a modernist project. Other observers of EBM have argued that EBM actually constitutes a retrenchment of, rather than an assault on, clinical medical autonomy via its relocation from individual doctor to collective professional body (Armstrong, 2002; Denny, 1999).

Participants in debates about EBM within the professions rarely invoke concerns about the decline of trust in medical authority (in contrast to the social scientific analyses just cited) but they do frequently allude to the economic implications and political uses of evidence-based practice in order to justify their positions. Many of the moral and political issues associated with EBM are played out in this area, technically outside the explicit parameters of EBM itself--that is, they concern the possible uses to which EBM technologies such as meta-analyses and systematic reviews can be put. Thus, evidence-based approaches have been criticised for providing healthcare management and organisations with ammunition to cut costs on grounds of insufficient evidence for certain health interventions; in the words of EBM's own founders, that EBM is 'perpetrated by the arrogant to serve cost cutters and suppress clinical freedom' (Sackett et al., 1996; also see Mykhalovskiy & Weir, 2004, on the 'political economy approach'). EBM proponents suggest, conversely, that resistance to EBM among clinicians on the grounds of preserving clinical autonomy is potentially harmful to patients since these clinicians are primarily concerned to protect their own reputations and profits. In these arguments both sides claim to represent the greater good and the higher moral ground (see also Traynor, 2000, who compares the writing style of 'evidence based movements' to evangelical religious discourse).

### What counts as evidence in EBM?

My original intention in examining critiques of EBM and responses to them was to explore underlying notions of what actually constitutes 'evidence' within EBM, beyond the definitions provided by exponents. The quantitative, essentially epidemiological definition of evidence used in EBM was most often identified as problematically restrictive in critiques classified as type 5 in Table 1--failure to consider patient views. For although in evidence-based clinical practice the starting point for selecting what population-based evidence is relevant is always the individual patient (or 'case'), patient narratives are not themselves usually regarded as 'evidence' within EBM. The apparent exclusion of 'patients voices' especially in the form of 'narrative'--a term often overextended in health care circles to refer to interview-derived qualitative material on patients views or experiences in general--has therefore been a particular focus of criticism. Alliances have developed between clinicians, especially psychiatrists, and sociologists, social anthropologists, narrative specialists and other social scientists in opposition to the dominance of epidemiology in making up the 'evidence base'. Recent meetings on Medicine and Narrative in the UK convened by reputable bodies such as the Drugs and Therapeutics Bulletin and the British Medical Association have featured sometimes fervent denunciations of EBM as dehumanising and calls for an explicitly resistant stance to EBM's incursions in favour of the putatively gentler, more patient-centred practice of 'Narrative-Based Medicine' (NBM).

Though some have argued that 'narrative' and 'evidence-based' approaches to clinical practice need not be opposed, since EBM is itself inherently interpretative and should incorporate 'NBM' (Greenhalgh, 1999), the predominant attitude of 'NBM' advocates toward EBM appears to be adversarial. Opposing EBM and NBM, however, necessarily implies accepting an epidemiological definition of 'evidence' as relating exclusively to the findings of studies that appear in the Cochrane Collaboration's hierarchy of research designs; if narrative is 'not-EBM' it is not evidence. This position relegates what patients say and how their health carers respond to the murky realms of inchoate experience (see also Littlewood, 2003, pp 257-258) on how the, "narrative alone" emphasis in medical anthropology' implies that we have lost conviction in sociocultural realities and 'must cede these truth claims to our patients' subjectivity'). More generally, this kind of difficulty implies that it is the methods used to collect 'evidence', rather than the nature of the evidence per se, that define whether or not data are potentially applicable to evidence-based practice. Narrative is simply one form of non-quantitative material that could, in an alternative or expanded representation, be construed as 'evidence'.

The issue of what counts as evidence within a quantitative paradigm that accepts the randomised controlled trial as the 'gold standard' is of particular relevance for qualitative social scientists in general and medical (social) anthropologists in particular. For paradoxically, over the same period that EBM has grown into a dominant movement, medical science and public health have increasingly accepted qualitative research approaches as legitimate strategies for the acquisition of useful knowledge. Although interpretative understandings produced by qualitative work in health circles are valued, qualitative researchers in health are commonly forced to argue for the legitimacy of their approaches within the confines of an 'evidence-based' framework. As qualitative and multidisciplinary approaches in medical, health services and public health research have become established, the drive towards evidence-based practice has led to increasing weight being placed on the rigour and verifiability of the methods used rather than on the findings themselves (cf. Eakin & Mykhalovskiy, 2003). The emphasis on method is based on assumptions that are erroneous when applied to qualitative health research in general, tending to result in superficial studies lacking in originality or insight (Lambert & McKevitt, 2002; Williams, 2001).

Moreover, the standardisation of qualitative research method is being achieved in a matter strikingly similar to the forms of standardisation that EBM has brought to bear on clinical practice (described above as 4, the production of formulaic guidelines). In recent years there has been an analogous proliferation of guidelines for conducting, analysing, reporting on and appraising qualitative research (Giacomini & Cook, 2000a, b; Greenhalgh & Taylor, 1997; Mays & Pope, 1996) directed at health professional audiences and at the producers of such research. Adherence to guidelines increases the likelihood of having work published in medical and health care journals, despite the strong constraints that requirements to demonstrate the use of particular methodological approaches place on research and, especially, on data analysis practices (Chapple & Rogers, 1998; Lambert & McKevitt, 2002). The publication of guides to critical appraisal intended for health professionals increase the pressure to conform to a highly specified methodology for qualitative research, although these sometimes contain misleading or incorrect recommendations for evaluating the quality of published studies (Barbour, 2001; Chapple & Rogers, 1998). This is problematic for many varieties of qualitative research style, including ethnography, solo (rather than team-based) research, and the use of data analysis techniques that do not include recommended methods such as double coding or grounded theory.

### Considering qualitative 'evidence': The example of anthropology

Ethnographic and other forms of anthropological research, for example, can plainly produce evidence just as much as the next RCT. The problem lies, rather, in the standards and criteria taken as authoritative in assessing the admissibility and veracity of such evidence. In medical education and practice, EBM reasonably requires the provision of tools for appraising and interpreting evidence and these are currently formulated according to epidemiological criteria. In consequence it would seem essential for social scientists engaged in health research to explicate the integrity and validity of their own approaches by elucidating what constitutes 'evidence' in their own disciplines. Notions of evidence remain implicit and unexamined in disciplines such as anthropology, however, although everyday disciplinary practices--evaluating a monograph, examining a PhD thesis or refereeing a paper based on ethnographic fieldwork--must of necessity draw on such notions. Applied anthropologists who work with other professions and disciplines are more used to explicating and defending their disciplinary practices than academic anthropologists whose colleagues and audiences are primarily fellow anthropologists. Nevertheless anthropology is so heterogeneous (or 'eclectic', Rapport & Overing, 2000) methodologically that systematic evaluation of anthropological research findings based on the methods used is, as indicated in the previous section, highly problematic. Anthropological knowledge is generally agreed to be experiential, context-specific, intersubjective and reflexive, and anthropologists are not comfortable, disciplinarily speaking, with providing any kind of mundane account of how they agree on what they know. Clearly however, evidence is about making certain claims as much as it is about representations; failure to consider seriously what the generic nature of anthropological evidence might be forestalls engagement with the notions of science and truth that underpin evidentiary thinking in the health professions and disciplines. This failure prevents anthropology from making such claims, even while its disciplinary practices and insights are in increasing demand within fields in which such 'evidence' is valued--albeit judged by the terms of the dominant discipline (hence the demands for methodological systematisation described in the previous section). The time may now be right, however, to re-engage with basic epistemological questions regarding the validity of anthropological knowledge claims and the plausibility of ethnographic accounts see (Descola, 2005; Wilson, 2004), laying the grounds for an examination of what counts as evidence in anthropology.

### Future trajectories for EBM: Structural influences and contextual dimensions

The main reason for taking seriously whether anthropological and other qualitative material can, by its nature, be admitted into evidence within health research, is to correct, or contest, the composition of the current evidence base. What strikes many social scientists as obviously lacking in descriptions of research evidence as represented within EBM (for example Fig. 2), is a place for--or even acknowledgement of--social structural influences and social, cultural, political and economic dimensions, despite their critically important role in determining health status and outcomes. This may be especially the case with respect to decision-making regarding public health and health service interventions, since here the informal sociological and cultural contextual information that many clinicians hold about their individual patients when practising EBM in clinical settings is not available. This is another aspect of the limitation described at the beginning of this paper (denoted as 2 in Table 1) as the individualist bias inherent in EBM parameters for evidence that affects information-gathering on such interventions.

Consistent with my portrayal of EBM as flexible and assimilationist in responding to critiques that identify limitations to its approach, some intriguing preemptive gestures have already been made towards the future possibility of incorporating social and institutional dimensions into EBM. A recent editorial from the McMaster group (Haynes et al., 2003) notes that the 'new' model (Fig. 2) does have limitations, 'For example, we have not included the important roles that society and health care organisations play in providing and limiting resources for health services. Rather our focus has purposely been on the decisions made by patients and their immediate healthcare providers, _leaving the bigger picture for another discussion._' (2003, p. 38, my emphasis).

If my analysis of the encompassing strategies of EBM, seen as a 'social movement' (Pope, 2003), is correct, incorporation or at least attempts to incorporate less tangible forms of evidence than that of trials results is inevitable. Implicit boundaries for defining evidence have not, as yet, been redrawn, nor have practices substantively altered. Recent initiatives suggest movement in this direction however, including the establishment of a Cochrane Collaboration working group on qualitative research and several studies examining methods for synthesising qualitative evidence (Campbell et al., 2003; Dixon-Woods, Agarwal, Young, Jones, & Sutton, 2004; Dixon-Woods, Fitzpatrick, & Roberts, 2001).

Many others in addition to those directly involved in these initiatives see such redefinition as desirable (e.g. Barbour, 2000; Green & Britten, 1998; Rycroft-Malone, et al 2004; Upshur, VanDenKerkhof, & Goel, 2001), with qualitative methods helping 'to broaden the scope of evidence based medicine' (Green & Britten, 1998). Similarly, many advocates of narrative-based medicine and evidence-based patient choice argue that patients' narratives, or doctors' accounts of patients' experiences, are forms of evidence that should be included in decision-making. It is one thing, however, to argue that 'in the debate about evidence based medicine, it is vital to reiterate that good "evidence" goes further than the results of meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials' (Green & Britten, 1998, p. 1231) and another to promote incorporation of non-statistical research findings into EBM. Given the methodological barriers to identifying, appraising and synthesising relevant qualitative material and the underlying epistemic distinctions between, for example, anthropological and epidemiologic knowledges, it is difficult to envisage a reformulation of 'evidence' that would be both acceptable and truly satisfactory to either professional activity.

Alternatively, Berkwitz has proposed training physicians in what he terms a 'social model of criticism' (to contrast with EBM's use of 'critical appraisal', which refers to the evaluation of research papers in purely methodologic terms) that would enhance their ability to recognise the social and cultural forces shaping research activities, the selection of evidence and the resulting decisions and policies (Berkwits, 1998). A third alternative to redrawing EBM's boundaries to accommodate social structural and cultural dimensions of medical practice through the incorporation and synthesis of non-quantitative material is instead to segregate these dimensions (as argued for the case of mental health nursing by Geanellos, 2004). It would be possible to confine EBM as a set of techniques and practices squarely to the deployment of statistical measurements of outcome derived from population research; and to insist on the framing of such rigorously bounded formulations by social and cultural research evidence, in order to assess the veracity and relevance of these formulations in real world contexts. This scenario could be the most attractive to those researchers and clinical practitioners who recognise the need to ensure quality and veracity by adhering to disciplinarily variant standards of research integrity.

My analysis of EBM's short but consistent history of incorporation and self-modification to encompass alleged limitations, however, indicates that this may be the least likely trajectory for EBM to take. Recent discussions of the ethical dimensions of EBM (reflecting the growing emphasis on bioethics generally) in the medical literature, both suggest an emergent sixth category of EBM critique and response, and provide additional support for my analysis of EBM's evolutionary orientation as tending toward assimilation rather than retrenchment. Whatever its future course, as EBM becomes institutionalised in health care it must inevitably affect the research work, methodological orientation and publishing practices of all disciplines allied or applied to medicine. This paper has considered the cases of qualitative research and of anthropology to exemplify possible limitations and transformations in EBM's further evolution, but my account is also salient for other cognate disciplines, such as the basic sciences (Lemon & Dunnett, 2005). Whether EBM's remarkable assimilationist tendencies are capable of encompassing research findings emerging from investigative activities rooted in fundamentally divergent epistemologies, remains to be seen.

## Acknowledgements

I am grateful to participants in the 2003 American Anthropological Association panel on Evidence-Based Practice that provided the initial impetus for this paper and particularly to my discussants, Robert Hahn and Deborah Gordon. I also thank Libby Bogdan-Lovis, George Davey Smith, Elisa Gordon and the Social Science and Medicine manuscript reviewers for their useful comments on an earlier draft of this paper.

## References

* Alderson et al. (2003) Alderson, P., Gliddon, L., & Chalmers, I. (2003). Academic recognition of critical appraisal and systematic reviews in British postgraduate medical education. _Medical Education_, _37_(4), 386.
* Armstrong (2002) Armstrong, D. (2002). Clinical autonomy, individual and collective: The problem of changing doctors' behaviour. _Social Science & Medicine_, _55_(10), 1771-1777.
* Barbour (2000) Barbour, R. S. (2000). The role of qualitative research in broadening the evidence base' for clinical practice. _Journal of Exaluation in Clinical Practice_, _6_(2), 155-163.
* Barbour (2001) Barbour, R. S. (2001). Checklists for improving rigour in qualitative research: A case of the tail wagging the dog? _BMJ_, _322_, 1115-1117.
* Berg (1995) Berg, M. (1995). Turning a practice into a science: Reconceptualizing postwar medical practice. _Social Studies of Science_, _25_, 437-476.
* Berg et al. (2000) Berg, M., Horstman, K., Plass, S., & Van Heusden, M. (2000). Guidelines, professionals and the production of objectivity: Standardisation and the professionalism of insurance medicine. _Sociology of Health & Illness_, _2_(6), 765-791.
* Berkwits (1998) Berkwits, M. (1998). From practice to research: The case for criticism in an age of evidence. _Social Science & Medicine_, _47_(10), 1539-1545.
* Campbell et al. (2003) Campbell, R., Pound, P., Pope, C., Britten, N., Pill, R., Morgan, M., et al. (2003). Evaluating meta-ethnography: A synthesis of qualitative research on lay experiences of diabetes and diabetes care. _Social Science & Medicine_, _56_(4), 671-684.

 * Carr-Hill (1995) Carr-Hill, R. (1995). Welcome? To the brave new world of evidence based medicine. _Social Science & Medicine_, _41_(11), 1467-1468.
* Chapple and Rogers (1998) Chapple, A., & Rogers, A. (1998). Explicit guidelines for qualitative research: A step in the right direction, a defence of the 'soft' option, or a form of sociological imperialism? _Family Practice_, _15_(6), 556-561.
* Charlton (1998) Charlton, B. G. (1998). Essay review. The audit society: Rituals of verification by Michael Power. _Journal of Echaution in Clinical Practice_, _4_(3), 249-253.
* Clinicians for the Restoration of Autonomous Practice (CRAP) Writing Group. (2002). EBM: Unmasking the ugly truth. _BMJ_, _325_, 1496-1498.
* Davey-Smith et al. (2002) Davey-Smith, G., Ebrahim, S., & Frankel, S. (2002). How policy informs the evidence: "Evidence based" thinking can lead to debased policy making. _BMJ_, _322_, 184-185.
* Davey-Smith and Egger (1998) Davey-Smith, G., & Egger, M. (1998). Incommunicable knowledge? Interpreting and applying the results of clinical trials and meta-analyses. _Journal of Clinical Epidemiology_, _51_(4), 289-295.
* Demar et al. (2004) Demar, C., Glasziou, P., & Mayer, D. (2004). Teaching evidence based medicine. _BMJ_, _329_(7473), 989-990.
* Denny (1999) Denny, K. (1999). Evidence-based medicine and medical authority. _Journal of Medical Humanities_, _20_(4), 247-263.
* Descola (2005) Descola, P. (2005). On anthropological knowledge. _Social Anthropology_, _13_(1), 65-73.
* Dieppe (1998) Dieppe, P. (1998). Annals of the rheumatic diseases. _Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases_, _57_, 385-386.
* Dixon-Woods et al. (2004) Dixon-Woods, M., Agarwal, S., Young, B., Jones, D., & Sutton, S. (2004). _Integrative approaches to qualitative and quantitative evidence_. Health Development Agency.
* Dixon-Woods et al. (2001) Dixon-Woods, M., Fitzpatrick, R., & Roberts, K. (2001). Including qualitative research in systematic reviews: Opportunities and problems. _Journal of Echaution in Clinical Practice_, _7_(2), 125-133.
* Dobrow et al. (2004) Dobrow, M. J., Goel, V., & Upshur, R. E. (2004). Evidence-based health policy: Context and utilisation. _Social Science & Medicine_, _58_(1), 207-217.
* Eakin & Mykhalovskiy (2003) Eakin, J. M., & Mykhalovskiy, E. (2003). Reframing the evaluation of qualitative health research: Reflections on a review of appraisal guidelines in the health sciences. _Journal of Echaution in Clinical Practice_, _9_(2), 187-194.
* Edwards & Elwyn (2001) Edwards, A., & Elwyn, G. (2001). _Evidence-based patient choice: Inevitable or impossible?_. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
* Evidence-Based Medicine Working Group (1992) Evidence-based medicine. A new approach to teaching the practice of medicine. _JAMA_, _268_(17), 2420-2425.
* Geanellos (2004) Geanellos, R. (2004). Nursing based evidence: Moving beyond evidence-based practice in mental health nursing. _Journal of Echaution in Clinical Practice_, _10_(2), 177-186.
* Giacomini & Cook (2000a) Giacomini, M. K., & Cook, D. J. (2000a). Users' guides to the medical literature: XXIII. Qualitative research in health care A. Are the results of the study valid? Evidence-Based Medicine Working Group. _JAMA_, _284_(3), 357-362.
* Giacomini & Cook (2000b) Giacomini, M. K., & Cook, D. J. (2000b). Users' guides to the medical literature: XXIII. Qualitative research in health care B. What are the results and how do they help me care for my patients? Evidence-Based Medicine Working Group. _JAMA_, _284_(4), 478-482.
* Gordon (1988) Gordon, D. (1988). Tenacious assumptions in western medicine. In M. Lock, & D. Gordon (Eds.), _Biomedicine examined_ (pp. 11-56). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
* Green & Britten (1998) Green, J., & Britten, N. (1998). Qualitative research and evidence based medicine. _BMJ_, _316_(7139), 1230-1232.
* Greenhalgh (1999) Greenhalgh, T. (1999). Narrative based medicine in an evidence based world. _BMJ_, _318_, 323-325.
* Greenhalgh & Hurwitz (1999) Greenhalgh, T., & Hurwitz, B. (1999). Narrative based medicine. Why study narrative? _BMJ_, _318_, 48-50.
* Greenhalgh & Taylor (1997) Greenhalgh, T., & Taylor, R. (1997). How to read a paper: Papers that go beyond numbers (qualitative research). _BMJ_, _315_, 740-743.
* Groen & Patel (1985) Groen, G. J., & Patel, V. L. (1985). Medical problem-solving: Some questionable assumptions. _Medical Education_, _19_, 95-100.
* Grol & Grimshaw (2003) Grol, R., & Grimshaw, J. (2003). From best evidence to best practice: Effective implementation of change in patients' care. _The Lancet_, _362_, 1225-1230.
* Haines & Donald (1998) Haines, A., & Donald, A. (1998). Getting research findings into practice. Making better use of research findings. _BMJ_, _317_, 72-75.
* Hampton (1983) Hampton, J. R. (1983). The end of clinical freedom. _British Medical Journal_, _287_(6401), 1237-1238.
* Hampton (2002) Hampton, J. R. (2002). Evidence-based medicine, opinion-based medicine, and real-world medicine. _Perspectives in Biology and Medicine_, _45_(4), 549-568.
* Haynes (1999) Haynes, R. B. (1999). Commentary: A warning to complementary medicine practitioners: Get empirical or else. _BMJ_, _319_, 1632.
* Haynes et al. (2002) Haynes, R. B., Devereaux, P. J., & Guyatt, G. H. (2002). Physicians' and patients' choices in evidence based practice. _BMJ_, _324_, 1350.
* Haynes et al. (2003) Haynes, R. B., Devereaux, P. J., & Guyatt, G. H. (2003). Clinical expertise in the era of evidence-based medicine and patient choice. _Evidence-Based Medicine_, \(7\), 36-38.
* Hope (2002) Hope, T. (2002). Evidence-based patient choice and psychiatry. _Evidence Based Mental Health_, _5_(4), 100-101.
* Isaacs & Fitzgerald (1999) Isaacs, D., & Fitzgerald, D. (1999). Seven alternatives to evidence based medicine. _BMJ_, _319_, 1618.
* Kassirer (1993) Kassirer, J. P. (1993). The quality of care and the quality of measuring it. _The New England Journal of Medicine_, _329_, 1263-1265.
* Lambert & McKevitt (2002) Lambert, H., & McKevitt, C. (2002). Anthropology in health research: From qualitative methods to multidisciplinary. _BMJ_, _325_, 210-213.
* Lemon & Dunnett (2005) Lemon, R., & Dunnett, S. B. (2005). Surveying the literature from animal experiments. _BMJ_, _330_(7498), 977-978.
* Leung & Whitty (2000) Leung, W. C., & Whitty, P. (2000). Is evidence based medicine neglected by royal college examinations? A descriptive study of their syllabi. _BMJ_, _321_(7261), 603-604.
* Littlewood (2003) Littlewood, R. (2003). Why narrative? Why now? _Anthroology and Medicine_, _10_(2), 255-261.
* Maeseneer et al. (2003) Maeseneer, J. M. D., Van Driel, M. L., Green, L. A., & Van Weel, C. (2003). The need for research in primary care. _The Lancet_, _362_, 1314-1319.
* Mays & Pope (1996) Mays, N., & Pope, C. (1996). _Qualitative research in health care_. London: BMJ Publishing.
* Mykhalovskiy (2003) Mykhalovskiy, E. (2003). Evidence-based medicine: Ambivalent reading and the clinical recontextualization of science. _Health_, _7_(3), 331-352.
* Mykhalovskiy & Weir (2004) Mykhalovskiy, E., & Weir, L. (2004). The problem of evidence-based medicine: Directions for social science. _Social Science & Medicine_, _59_(5), 1059-1069.
* National Institute for Clinical Excellence (2004). Website (Accessed 29-10-2004).

 * Niessen et al. (2000) Niessen, L. W., Grijseeds, E. W., & Rutten, F. F. (2000). The evidence-based approach in health policy and health care delivery. _Social Science & Medicine_, _51_(6), 859-869.
* Norman (1999) Norman, G. R. (1999). Examining the assumptions of evidence-based medicine. _Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice_, _5_(2), 139-147.
* Parker (2002) Parker, M. (2002). Whither our art? Clinical wisdom and evidence-based medicine. _Medicine, Health Care and Philosophy_, \(5\), 273-280.
* Pope (2003) Pope, C. (2003). Resisting evidence: The study of evidence-based medicine as a contemporary social movement. _Health_, _7_(3), 267-282.
* Power (1997) Power, M. (1997). _The Audit Society: Rituals of Verification_. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
* Rappolt (1997) Rappolt, S. G. (1997). Clinical guidelines and the fate of medical autonomy in Ontario. _Social Science & Medicine_, _44_(7), 977-987.
* Rapport & Overing (2000) Rapport, N., & Overing, J. (2000). Methodological eclecticism, in _Social and cultural anthropology: The key concepts_ (pp. 245-249). London and New York: Routledge.
* Richards (1997) Richards, J. P. (1997). Evidence based general practice. _BMJ._, _314_, 525.
* Rogers (2002) Rogers, W. A. (2002). Evidence-based medicine in practice: Limiting or facilitating patient choice? _Health Expectations_, _5_(2), 95-103.
* Rycroft-Malone et al. (2004) Rycroft-Malone, J., Seers, K., Titchen, A., Harvey, G., Kitson, A., & McCormack, B. (2004). What counts as evidence in evidence-based practice? _Journal of Advanced Nursing_, _47_(1), 81-90.
* Sackett et al. (1985) Sackett, D. L., Haynes, R. B., Guyatt, G. H., & Tugwell, P. (1985). _Clinical epidemiology: A basic science for clinical medicine_. Boston: Little, Brown and Company.
* Sackett et al. (1991) Sackett, D. L., Haynes, R. B., Guyatt, G. H., & Tugwell, P. (1991). _Clinical epidemiology: A basic science for clinical medicine_. Boston: Little, Brown and Company.
* Sackett et al. (1996) Sackett, D. L., Rosenberg, W. M. C., Muir Gray, J. A., Haynes, R. B., & Richardson, W. S. (1996). Evidence based medicine: What it is and what it isn't. _BMJ_, _312_, 71-72.
* Schattner & Fletcher (2003) Schattner, A., & Fletcher, R. H. (2003). Research evidence and the individual patient. _Quarterly Journal of Medicine_, _96_, 1-5.
* Shore & Wright (1999) Shore, C., & Wright, S. (1999). Audit culture and anthropology: Neo-liberalism in British higher education. _Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute_, \(5\), 557-575.
* Sinclair (2004) Sinclair, S. (2004). Evidence-based medicine: A new ritual in medical teaching. _British Medical Bulletin_, _69_, 179-196.
* Smith et al. (2003) Smith, A., Goodwin, D., Mort, M., & Pope, C. (2003). Expertise in practice: An ethnographic study exploring acquisition and use of knowledge in anaesthesia. _British Journal of Anaesthesia_, _91_(3), 319-328.
* Strathern (2000) Strathern, M. (2000). _Audit cultures: Anthropological studies in accountability, ethics and the academy_. London: Routledge.
* Straus & Jones (2004) Straus, S. E., & Jones, G. (2004). What has evidence based medicine done for us? _BMJ_, _329_(7473), 987-988.
* Sullivan & Macnaughton (1996) Sullivan, F. M., & Macnaughton, R. J. (1996). Evidence in consultations: Interpreted and individualised. _Lancet_, _348_, 941-943.
* Tallon et al. (2000) Tallon, D., Chard, J. A., & Dieppe, P. A. (2000). Relation between agendas of the research community and the research consumer. _Lancet_, _355_, 2037-2040.
* Timmermans & Berg (1997) Timmermans, S., & Berg, M. (1997). Standardization in action: Achieving local universality through medical protocols. _Social Studies of Science_, _27_(2), 273-305.
* Traynor (2000) Traynor, M. (2000). Purity, conversion and the evidence based movements. _Health_, _4_(2), 139-158.
* Upshur et al. (2001) Upshur, R. E., VanDenKerkhof, E. G., & Goel, V. (2001). Meaning and measurement: An inclusive model of evidence in health care. _Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice_, _7_(2), 91-96.
* Villanueva-Russell (2004) Villanueva-Russell, Y. (2004). Evidence-based medicine and its implications for the profession of chiropractic. _Social Science & Medicine_, _60_(3), 545-561.
* Williams (2001) Williams, B. (2001). Longer checklists or reflexivity? _eBMJ_ Rapid Responses. 04/05/2001.
* Williams & Garner (2002) Williams, D. D. R., & Garner, J. (2002). The case against 'the evidence': A different perspective on evidence-based medicine. _British Journal of Psychiatry_, _180_, 8-12.
* Wilson & Mills (2002) Wilson, K., & Mills, E. J. (2002). Introducing evidence-based complementary and alternative medicine: Answering the challenge. _Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine_, _8_(2), 103-105.
* Wilson (2004) Wilson, R. A. (2004). The trouble with truth: Anthropology's epistemological hypochondria. _Anthroology Today_, _20_(5), 14-18.
* Wood et al. (1998) Wood, M., Ferlie, E., & Fitzgerald, L. (1998). Achieving clinical behaviour change: A case of becoming indeterminate. _Social Science & Medicine_, _47_(11), 1729-1738.

 