

# Electromagnetic Tracking in Medicine--A Review of Technology, Validation, and Applications

Alfred M. Franz*, Tamas Haidegger, Wolfgang Birkfellner, Kevin Cleary, Terry M. Peters, and Lena Maier-Hein

Manuscript received January 28, 2014; revised April 15, 2014; accepted April 27, 2014. Date of publication May 05, 2014; date of current version July 30, 2014. This work was supported by the Research Training Group 1126: "Intelligent Surgery" funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG), by the Hungarian NKTH OTKA CK80316 Grant at BME and by the Intranural Funding Program of the German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Grant for Young Investigators: "Radio-Frequency identification (RFID) for wireless tracking of medical instruments." The work of T. Haidegger was supported by the HAS Bolyai Fellowship. _Asterisk indicates corresponding author_.
* A. M. Franz is with the German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Junior Group Computer-Assisted Interventions, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany (e-mail: a.franz@dfz.de).
* T. Haidegger is with the Obuda University, ABC Center for Intelligent Robotics, H-1034 Budapest, Hungary, and also with the Austrian Center for Medical Innovation and Technology (ACMIT), A-2700 Wiener Neustadt, Austria.
* W. Birkfellner is with the Medical University Vienna, Center for Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering, and Christian Doppler Laboratory for Medical Radiation Research for Radiation Oncology, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.
* K. Cleary is with the Sheikh Zaved Institute for Pediatric Surgical Innovation, Children's National Medical Center, Washington, D.C. 20010 USA.
* T. M. Peters is with the Robarts Research Institute at Western University, London, ON, Na 5H7 Canada.
* L. Maier-Hein is with the German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Junior Group Computer-Assisted Interventions, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany (e-mail: l.maier-hein@dfz.de).
* Color version of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMI.2014.2321777

###### Abstract

Object tracking is a key enabling technology in the context of computer-assisted medical interventions. Allowing the continuous localization of medical instruments and patient anatomy, it is a prerequisite for providing instrument guidance to subsurface anatomical structures. The only widely used technique that enables real-time tracking of small objects without line-of-sight restrictions is electromagnetic (EM) tracking. While EM tracking has been the subject of many research efforts, clinical applications have been slow to emerge. The aim of this review paper is therefore to provide insight into the future potential and limitations of EM tracking for medical use. We describe the basic working principles of EM tracking systems, list the main sources of error, and summarize the published studies on tracking accuracy, precision and robustness along with the corresponding validation protocols proposed. State-of-the-art approaches to error compensation are also reviewed in depth. Finally, an overview of the clinical applications addressed with EM tracking is given. Throughout the paper, we report not only on scientific progress, but also provide a review on commercial systems. Given the continuous debate on the applicability of EM tracking in medicine, this paper provides a timely overview of the state-of-the-art in the field.

 Computer-assisted interventions (CAI), electromagnetic tracking (EMT), image-guided therapy (IGT), intraoperative surgical navigation, magnetic tracking.

## I Introduction

Computer-assisted interventions (CAI) are becoming an integral part of modern patient care [137]. This is attributed to a number of expected benefits compared to conventional approaches, including increased accuracy, reduction of complications and decreased intervention time. These benefits of CAI have been shown in various studies, particularly for neurosurgical and orthopedic applications [49, 137]. Within the field of CAI, image-guided therapy (IGT) is based on the registration of pre-operative [e.g., computed tomography (CT)] or intra-operative [e.g., ultrasound (US)] patient data to the actual operative field. In this manner, IGT can provide freehand navigation or guidance for mechatronic positioning of medical instruments [137, Ch. 9]. Therefore, these methods commonly rely on the localization of the equipment with respect to the patient. This localization in 3-D space is referred to as tracking, and is a key enabling technology for CAI. Optical tracking uses cameras to localize visual markers and is the most established tracking modality [137, Ch. 2]. Its main drawback is the requirement for a free line-of-sight to the markers, which is not feasible for many applications. Especially for minimally invasive surgical procedures, instruments such as flexible endoscopes, catheters and needle tips must be tracked inside the human body. For such applications, electromagnetic (EM) tracking has emerged as the method of choice that enables localization of small EM sensors in a given EM field without the requirement for line-of-sight.

It is pertinent to comment on the terminology employed in this paper. The term "Electromagnetic" to describe the tracking phenomenon arises from the fact that electromagnets are responsible for producing changing (ac) or quasi-static (dc) magnetic fields, which induce currents in solenoids or fluxgate sensors embedded in the detectors. The phenomenon responsible for the operation of these tracking systems relies solely on magnetic induction rather than any strict electromagnetic effect. Nevertheless, while this technology is referred to by both the terms "magnetic tracking" (MT) and "electromagnetic tracking" (EMT), the latter has become the more common, having been adopted by the manufacturers of these devices, and so we retain this terminology throughout the paper.

Unfortunately, EMT technology has some drawbacks regarding clinical application. EM tracking accuracy can be compromised by magnetic field distortion due to nearby medical diagnostic devices such as CT or MRI scanners [206], or other ferromagnetic objects [141]. Furthermore, additional hardware components of the tracking system, such as the EMfield generator, must be placed close to the patients or be attached to them, as in the case of a patient-mounted receiver unit (e.g., _CORTRAK_ system, CORPAK Medsystems, see Section VI-B). Medical equipment such as instruments and imaging devices must be equipped with fragile EM sensors, which in most cases must be tethered by a cable to system hardware. However, different EM tracking systems on the market have been customized for specific applications, and can minimize such drawbacks for specific procedures.

Various publications focus on _EM tracking in medicine_ by describing the validation, integration, or usage of these systems in a medical context. The content of the papers range from technical technology descriptions and accuracy assessments to clinical applications, including patient studies. While this literature includes many important findings relating to the use of EM tracking in medicine, the picture provided of the field is far from unified. To the authors' knowledge, there has been no general review published that summarizes the domain. To rectify this, this paper tries to present a complete review of the literature, and give an analytical overview on the state-of-the-art, highlighting future research directions.

## II Methods of Literature Research

Due to the diversity of the field described above, _EM tracking in medicine_ was divided into the four main topical areas _I. Fundamentals_, _II. System Assessment_, _III. Distortion Compensation_, and _IV. Clinical Applications_. Using these titles, a systematic search of relevant literature was performed in the period from December 2012 to June 2013, using the scientific search engines _PubMed_,1_IEEE Xplore2_ and _Google Scholar_.3 We extended the search by a manual screening of the most important conference proceedings, namely SPIE4 Medical Imaging, CARS,5 MICCA6 and several IEEE7 conferences. Additionally, the literature repositories (including online library access and conference proceedings) of the authors and other experts were screened for further important papers. Then, the abstracts of all findings were scanned to exclude clearly irrelevant papers that did not cover EM tracking at all. In the next step, all remaining papers were briefly summarized and rated by the authors (from 0: "clearly irrelevant" to 10: "clearly relevant"). In this step, journal papers were preferred in the cases when multiple similar papers were published by the same authors. Based on the resulting arranged prioritized list, the papers were reviewed in depth and finally the sections were written. These methods were refined for each topical area as described below.

Footnote 1: Available online: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed

Footnote 2: Available online: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org

Footnote 3: Available online: http://scholar.google.de/

Footnote 4: Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE), http://spie.org

Footnote 5: Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery (CARS), http://www.cars-int.org

Footnote 6: Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention (MICCAI), http://www.micai.org

Footnote 7: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), http://www.ieee.org

Footnote 8: Authorized licensed use limited to: Escuela Superior de Ingeniería Mecanica, Downloaded on March 27,2024 at 18.07:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1. **Fundamentals**: Papers on EM tracking fundamentals rarely can be found in _PubMed_, because the topic is too technical. Thus, we also performed a _IEEE Xplore_ search using the search terms "Magnetic Positioning," "Electromagnetic Tracking," and "Electromagnetic Localization." The systematic search resulted in 84 papers, which were reduced to 14 by removing duplicates and clearly irrelevant papers. This was extended by a manual search, resulting in 44 additional papers, 11 patents and a patent review, as well as three theses. After reviewing the total number of 73 documents, we decided to cite 26.
2. **System Assessment**: A _PubMed_ search was performed with the search terms "Accuracy" and "Assessment" that were combined with each of the terms "EM/Electromagnetic/Magnetic Tracking," "NDI Aurora," "Ascension Microbird/Trakstar/Fastrak/Isotrak," "Polhemus," and "Calypso" using _AND_. The search was extended by a manual scanning of the proceedings of conferences which are not listed in _PubMed_. These included conferences as described above, and was completed by a free manual search employing _Google Scholar_. This led to 163 results that were reduced to 66 after removing duplicates and clearly nonrelevant titles (see Fig. 1). Nine of the papers were moved to the other topical areas after processing the abstract, and another 10 were dropped as nonrelevant. Having read these papers, we decided to include 47 publications.
3. **Distortion Compensation**: _PubMed_ does not provide relevant publications for the search terms that were applied in this area. The screening was extended to _IEEE Xplore_, using the search terms _"Document Title":Electromagnetic Tracking_ and _"Document Title":Calibration_ combined with _AND_, which resulted in five possible relevant findings and to _Google Scholar_ using the search term _"Calibration electromagnetic tracking"_, leading to seven findings. This systematic research was completed by a manual search resulting in an overall number of 46 papers, theses, and patents. After screening these documents, we decided to discuss 22 papers, three theses, and six patents.

Fig. 1: Flow diagram of the literature research process, broken down along the topical areas presented in this paper.

 IV **Clinical Applications**: Using _PubMed_, the publication titles were searched for the term "Electromagnetic" in combination with "Guidance," "Tracking Navigation," and "Navigation." Additionally, a search for "Magnetic Navigation" was limited by adding NOT ("Magnetic Resonance" OR "Remote Magnetic Navigation") to avoid too many false positive results. A manual search also was performed, leading to 276 results, later reduced to 215 by removing clearly nonrelevant titles and duplicates (see Fig. 1). During abstract scanning, five of these results were moved to other topics and 61 were considered as nonrelevant. After scanning of the remaining 149 full papers, we decided to cite 79 aiming to cover all clinical applications, but preferentially citing the most relevant publications.

Overall, the literature research led to a list of 398 potentially relevant papers on EM tracking, as shown in Fig. 1. A few citations that were not part of the literature research were added for discussion, which resulted in some additional references to those included in Fig. 1. The following sections present the relevant literature for each of the four areas, and major findings are discussed in depth at the end of each section. The last two sections present a summary and outlook to future R&D directions, followed by a conclusion.

## III Fundamentals

As shown in Fig. 2, EM tracking localizes small sensors inside a magnetic field of known geometry, which is created by a field generator (FG). The idea of sensor localization by means of magnetic positioning first emerged in the 1970s, when Wynn _et al._ presented a method for 2-D tracking [204]. Based on this work, Kuipers [87] and Raab _et al._[148] described the first tracking methods for positioning and orientation of a magnetic sensor. Besides these early works that presented the principles of EM tracking, a plethora of papers, patents and books were subsequently published. Manufactures introduced commercial EM tracking systems [121] that were then used for further studies by many authors, e.g., [19, 41, 61, 134, 194]. This section gives an overview of the fundamentals of EM tracking based on 26 papers, theses, books, and patents found during the literature search as described in Section II. Information is given on the _physical background_ of tracking and the _magnetic sensors_ it employs, and the basic principles of _EM tracking techniques_ plus the technology of _field generators_ are summarized. Another important issue in this context is the identification of possible _sources of errors_. The end of this section describes commercially available EM tracking systems.

### _Physical Background_

Physically, EM tracking utilizes magnetic fields of known geometry to determine the pose of sensors for measuring magnetic flux or magnetic fields. The magnetic reference field either can be produced by permanent magnets or by electromagnetism [180, p.885]; in the latter case, the structure of the magnetic reference field is governed by the law of Biot-Savart. The geometry of the emitting coil assembly and the type of current sent through the coils determines the shape and the geometric properties of the aforementioned field. As it is possible to control the dynamic behavior of the reference field, it is possible to encode both spatial position and orientation relative to the reference field. For actual measurements inside a magnetic field, special sensors are needed. These are described in the following section.

### _Magnetic Sensors_

A basic component of EM tracking systems is the magnetic sensor. Since the magnetic flux density \(\vec{B}\left[\mathrm{Weber}(\mathrm{Wb})\right]=\frac{kg\cdot m^{*}}{A\cdot s^{ 2}}\) cannot be determined directly, magnetic sensors measure the magnetic flux \(\Phi\left[\mathrm{Tesla}(\mathrm{T})\right.=\frac{kg}{A\cdot s^{2}}\right]\), which is defined as the component of \(\vec{B}\) that passes through a specific point/surface. Note that a sensor only measures the gradient of a magnetic field that represents the difference in the magnetic field intensity between different positions inside the field [46]. Thus, inhomogeneous magnetic fields, such as those created by magnetic dipoles are needed for measurement. Within such a known inhomogeneous magnetic field, there is a correlation between \(\Phi\) and the distance to the source of the field, which is the starting point for magnetic positioning methods as described in Section III-C. In the context of EM tracking, different types of sensors are used to measure \(\Phi\).

* **Search coils** use inductors to measure the magnetic flux as a function of the time \(t\). Thus, an alternating magnetic field is needed for these sensors to measure a voltage \(e\), given by \[e=-N\frac{d\Phi}{dt}\] (1) where \(e\) is voltage, \(N\) is number of coil turns, \(\Phi\) is magnetic flux, and \(t\) is time.
* **Fluxgate sensors** use two inversely arranged inductors to measure the second harmonic Fourier component of the magnetic field. Thus, a fluxgate can vectorially measure magnetic fields that are static or alternating with a low frequency.
* **Other magnetic sensors** including Hall Effect and superconducting quantum interference devices (SOUIDs) currently are not in use for medical EM tracking. However,

Fig. 2: Principle of intra-operative EM tracking.

 SQUIDs already have been described in a patent for possible use in EM tracking [20].

Different manufacturers sell magnetic sensors for EM tracking, as shown in Fig. 3. While it is feasible to miniaturize these sensors to a diameter smaller than 1 mm, a cable is still required to connect a sensor to the control unit. Although Polhemus (Polhemus Inc., Colchester, VT, USA) offers wireless sensors, the requirement to use an active transmitter together with an energy supply to the sensor makes them more complex and much larger. Some manufacturers also sell ready-to-use medical instruments equipped with EM sensors. Examples include catheters and needles from NDI or _eTRAX_ needles from CIVCO (CIVCO Medical Solutions, Kalona, IA, USA).

Some authors proposed combining EM sensors with other technologies to improve the accuracy of tracking. Whenever line-of-sight is available, it is possible to use optical tracking systems to fuse the data (for example, [60, 62, 88, 117, 151]). A method not requiring line-of-sight was proposed by Liu _et al._, who used an accelerometer [101], and a wireless solution was developed by Ren _et al._[150]. Since such sensors currently are not available on the market, they are not widely used.

Some systems localize passive transponders [Fig. 3(d)] instead of magnetic sensors. Passive transponders do not measure the magnetic field, but use it for energy supply and emit a radio-frequency signal for localization. This technology is addressed separately at the end of the next subsection.

### _EM Tracking Techniques_

Different authors describe techniques to localize magnetic sensors inside a magnetic field [73, 164, 204]. When acquiring at least three measurements, e.g., by sequentially activating different magnetic fields, a nonlinear system of equations is derived, which can be solved by using Newton's method [164]. To explain the basic concept of EM tracking, some authors use spherical coordinates introduced in Fig. 4[87, 148]. The distance \(R\) from the source of the magnetic field to the sensor can be determined by exploiting the inverse-cube attenuation in near-field applications, or the signal propagation delay in far-field applications [87]. If using several sources in a known setup, the position of the sensor can be determined by triangulation [140]. Another possibility is the determination of the angles \(\alpha\) and \(\beta\) (Fig. 4) by sequential source excitations along the standard basis vectors, or some linear combination of these [87], [117, p.2]. In practice, this means there are multiple differently aligned inductors. These inductors are commonly combined into one device called the field generator (FG), see Section III-D.

The methods mentioned above only allow for the determination of the sensor's position, but not its orientation (Fig. 4). One way to obtain sensor orientation is to combine multiple sensors on a tracking tool in a known position and then to use this information to determine the orientation. However, it also is feasible to gain information about the orientation from a single magnetic sensor. A magnetic dipole, such as the sensor's inductor, is axially symmetric, which limits this information to two degrees-of-orientation. Thus, five degrees-of-freedom (DoF), three for the position, and two for the orientation, can be determined by these sensors. Five DoF sensors are quite common for EM tracking devices. For six DoF tracking, two inductors can be combined. Although manufacturers offer small six DoF sensors, they are bigger than their five DoF counterparts. In practice, EM tracking systems allow for tracking of a few of these sensors with update rates of 40-250 Hz [121]. Note that most systems, e.g., the NDI _Aurora_ system (see Section III-F), are able to read out their sensors in parallel, thus the number of connected sensors does not affect the update rate of one single sensor.

It is important to note that some systems use quasi-static direct current (dc) magnetic fields, while others use alternating current (ac) magnetic fields. The main difference between these systems is the employed sensor technique. While search coils need ac fields for magnetic flux measurements, fluxgate sensors are used in pulsed dc fields (see Section III-B) [137, Ch. 2].

Another point is that the principle of tracking the sensor can be reversed and the source can be tracked relative to the sensor. This was proposed for tracking a feeding tube [12], and for instrument tracking in general [11]. However, tracking of

Fig. 4: Magnetic dipoles of the source and the sensor in polar coordinates of the source. Position of the sensor is represented by the triplet POS \([\mathrm{R},\alpha,\beta]\), the orientation by the triplet ROT \([\psi,\theta,\phi]\).

Fig. 3: Examples of magnetic sensors for EM tracking. (a) Different sensors for the Ascension dc tracking system. Photograph courtesy of Ascension Technology Corporation. (b) Sensor for the Polhemus ac tracking system. Photograph courtesy of Polhemus Inc. (c) SiN DoF Sensor for the NDI _Aurora_ ac tracking system. Photograph courtesy of Northern Digital Inc. (d) Passive EM transponder of the Calypso _GPS for the Body_ system, referred to as a _beacon_. Photograph courtesy of Varian Medical Systems Inc.

 more than one object at the same time is not possible using this approach.

There are some other tracking techniques that also are referred to as _EM tracking_ or _magnetic tracking_, yet, the underlying principle is fundamentally different. One such technique is the tracking of small permanent magnets. In this case, magnetic sensors are part of the tracking system and the magnetic field of the tracked object is measured. A serious limitation is that only one magnet can be tracked, but this approach does not require wiring. This technique has been used in research studies [138], but the existing systems are experimental and only play a minor role in the field of CAI.

Another tracking technique uses passive transponders [137, Ch. 2], [138]. These transponders use a magnetic field for energy supply to emit a location signal to external sensors/antennas in a known arrangement. The position can be determined by signal intensity, delay or angular phase shift. Such a system, referred to as Calypso _GPS for the Body_ was presented by Varian Medical Systems Inc. (Palo Alto, CA, USA). The system supports three trackable transponders, referred to as _beacons_, with resonance frequencies of 300, 400, and 500 kHz [201]. These _beacons_ are excited by the system in a sequential manner and the position of each is determined by a sensor array that measures the emitted location signal [6, 104]. Note that the Calypso system is an example of true electromagnetic technology being used in a tracking system, as discussed in Section I. Another tracking method based on passive transponders has recently been proposed for radio-frequency identification (RFID) chips [158, 55, 191]. However, within passive transponder technologies, only the Calypso system plays an important role in clinical practice.

### _Field Generators_

To create the magnetic fields needed for EM tracking, field generators are used. As mentioned before, an FG needs to sequentially generate at least three different magnetic fields of known geometry. Inside the FG, inductors are used, as shown for the NDI Tetrahedron FG in Fig. 5. In this early FG, the inductors are aligned in a tetrahedron shape to generate magnetic fields as proposed by Kirsch _et al_. [73]. An important property of each field generator is the tracking volume, which describes the area around the generator where sensors can be tracked. For the Tetrahedron FG, the tracking volume covers up to 0.5 m around the FG, which is a typical scale for such a system [34, p.8].

In many cases, customized field generators offer advantages such as better possibilities of placement, or more robustness against distortions in a particular environment. Thus, manufacturers have presented different types of stand-alone FGs, while others were specially developed for medical products. Table I gives an overview of the types with their typical properties, and Fig. 6 shows example images.

_Standard_ FGs are available from various manufacturers and so are the most widespread. _Flat_ field generators were developed for direct placement under the reclining patient, offering the capability to shield the magnetic field against distortions from below, and even to hide them inside the patient table. This type is used by some commercial products, as in the _CARTO XP_ (Biossense Webster Inc., Diamond Bar, CA, USA) or the _iLogic_ (superDimension Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) system. _Mobile_ FGs are small and can be placed directly at the area of interest, which is a benefit because tracking accuracy is high near the FG [102], but also is a necessity because the tracking volume is

Fig. 5: Example of a first generation EM field generator: the NDI Tetrahedron FG. (a) Sketch from Kirsch _et al_., similar to [73]. Photograph courtesy of Northern Digital Inc. (b) Photograph of the corresponding coils in an open FG. Reprinted with permission from [34].

Fig. 6: Examples of field generators for EM tracking. Photograph courtesy of Northern Digital Inc., and Ascension Technology Corporation.

 quite small. _Long range_ FGs that cover areas up to a couple of meters are available from Polhemus.

All these FGs contain a set of inductors arranged in a particular pattern (Fig. 5). One possibility to generate differently aligned magnetic fields is to rotate one inductor, as proposed by Ge _et al._[43]. The Calypso system contains a FG for energy supply for the transponders [201], but in contrast to other FGs, this example is not involved in localization [201]. However, the tracking volume of the Calypso system covering \(14\) cm \(\times\)\(14\) cm \(\times\)\(27\) cm is smaller than that of others [6, 104].

### _Sources of Error_

There are different sources of error for EM tracking systems. Laws of physics, limitations of design, and imperfection in manufacturing or environmental noise can all lead to erroneous localization. While some errors can be dealt with only at the system developer/manufacturer side, many others can be handled with careful experimental design and execution [170]. Different forms can be used to express errors and noise, however, for Gaussian noise, mean \(\pm\) standard deviation (STD) is most commonly employed. In the following, classification of these errors is discussed, and _Inherent System Errors_, _Field Distortion Errors_, and _Motion-Induced Errors_ then are introduced in detail.

#### Error Classification

In general, errors describe the deviation of the measurement and a known reference value. Like every observation, magnetic field measurements are typically affected by systematic errors and random noise. The latter is sometimes referred to as jitter and appears during the measurements of a fixed sensor over a period of time [117]. However, to further complicate the analysis, another possible reason for random noise might be dynamic errors at a high frequency. In addition, there is a possible error caused by the manufacturing inaccuracies.

Traditionally, EMT errors are classified as _static_, when a sensor stays in a fixed position and _dynamic_, which typically arises due to sensor movement. Static errors might be subdivided into systematic errors (_static distortions_) and a random noise (_jitter_), while dynamic errors include _dynamic distortions_ and the _sensor velocity error_[117]. However, this classification might be misleading, since a constantly moving sensor in a homogeneous field will show both systematic and random error components that are difficult to distinguish or handle separately. Fig. 7 shows the errors discussed in this paragraph.

From the application point of view, the overall effect of errors is important, and the proportion of the systematic part that can be handled with calibration. Random errors only can be handled using filtering. It often happens that only three translational components are used by a specific CAI system. In such cases, typically only the three DoFs of the position are of interest, but for a complete error classification all possible DoFs should be taken into account.

#### Inherent System Errors

Fundamentally, the FG has technical limits in accuracy and reproducibility of the generated magnetic field. These problems were reported thoroughly in the case of custom made FGs [65]. Calibration can deal with systematic errors, while filtering may be useful to tackle random errors. The first publications on EM tracking already purposed random noise reduction methods by using previous measurements, moving average or Kalman filters [87, 148]. It is typically assumed that all system noises are symmetric and follow a Gaussian distribution. However, more precise measurements do not support that theory with evidence [170]. Since position values are calculated from current measurements, these derivations also introduce some error in localization. Factory calibration of FGs and sensors plays an immense role in performance improvement. The quality of a tracking system regarding noise is referred to as inherent accuracy. The overall inherent precision might depend on the environment, but the noise cannot be reduced beyond a certain level. When performing system assessment trials, it is important to replicate measurements under very similar environmental conditions.

#### Field Distortion Errors

Magnetic fields interfere with ferromagnetic materials and/or other fields in the surrounding area [128], which is represented in the measurements as additive noise. Naturally, also expressed by the _Biot-Savart law_, magnetic fields are generated by every electric current [180]. As EM tracking relies on the known geometry of the magnetic field, its accuracy is susceptible to these distortions. Furthermore, the changing of magnetic fields induces eddy currents in conductors that also can cause secondary magnetic fields, and this also may disturb the measurements. In summary, there are four major sources of magnetic field distortions (excluding the error originating from the imperfect modeling of the field under standard conditions).

* Ferromagnetic materials.
* Eddy currents in other conductive materials, induced by the magnetic field itself.
* External currents inside the magnetic field, e.g., caused by other electronic devices,
* Inhomogeneous wave transportation medium, such as air or the human body, because all theoretical EM equations refer to a vacuum.

Some EM tracking systems, such as the Ascension systems (see Section III-F) use pulsed quasi static dc fields to avoid eddy currents [138]. However, these systems are still affected by the other types of errors. In principle, it is possible to compensate for systematic field distortions by calibration on the system level [72]. These techniques are described in detail in Section V.

#### Motion-Induced Errors

Besides distortions, dynamic effects, including the sensor velocity that can affect the tracking accuracy and distortions caused by external moving materials such as a changing environment also can cause EM tracking errors [60, 117].

Fig. 7: Classification of EM tracking errors.

 

### _Commercial Systems_

As a consequence of the geographically scattered development and continuous publishing and patentting on EM tracking, several manufacturers developed different stand-alone EM tracking systems for medical applications. The earliest, based on a magnetic fields (Section III-C) was presented by Polhemus Inc. (Colchester, VT, USA) [121, 137, Ch. 2], and other companies soon entered the market. An overview of the current manufacturers is given in Fig. 8.

Ascension Technology (Burlington, VT, USA) developed an EM tracking system based on a dc-driven magnetic field. Different models of the system as well as customized field generators and miniaturized sensors designed for medical purposes are available (Fig. 3). Northern Digital (NDI) Inc. (Waterloo, ON, Canada) presented a ac-driven EM tracking device, _Aurora_, with customized FGs and sensors. In July 2012, NDI acquired Ascension and decided to maintain both product lines. ac-driven EM tracking devices also are available from Polhemus, although they are not focused on medical products, but rather on other applications such as motion tracking. Thus, Polhemus offers long range FGs and wireless solutions.

The stand-alone EM tracking systems mentioned above have been integrated into various medical devices. For example, the Ascension system is used in the _Virtual Navigator_ system (Esaote Group, Genova, Italy), while the NDI _Aurora_ is part of the _Veran ig4_ system (Veran Medical Technologies Inc., St. Louis, MO, USA). However, some manufacturers of medical products also developed their own EM tracking systems that are available as part of their products, but not as stand-alone EM tracking systems. Example systems are _iLogic_ (superDimension Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA), _CARTO XP_ (Biosense Webster Inc., Diamond Bar, CA, USA), _Stealth-Station AxiEM_ (Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA), _ScopeGuide_ (Olympus Corp., Tokyo, Japan), and _CORTRAK_ (CORPAK MedSystems Inc., Buffalo Grove, IL, USA). Another example is the Calypso _GPS for the Body_ system for radiation therapy, which includes a unique tracking technology described in Section III-C. All these commercial integrated medical products are discussed in detail in Section VI-B. There is also a controller for video games, referred to as _Hydra_ (Razer Inc., San Diego, CA, USA), which uses EM tracking for controller tracking and has already been used in a scientific context [8].

## IV System Assessment

In accordance with the laws of physics, the accuracy of EM tracking is vulnerable to distortions in the magnetic field, originating from any sources, such as metals or magnetic fields of other devices [206]. Since this is the major limiting factor of the technology, assessment of EM tracking devices has been the focus of research for many years. This is represented by 47 findings on this topic during the literature research described in Section II. Based on this literature, an overview of assessment protocols is presented in this section. In Section IV-B, results of assessment studies are summarized, and then all protocols and results are discussed.

### _Assessment Protocols_

While early studies mostly used their own assessment protocols and comparability of these studies is poor, standardized protocols also have been proposed, and were used in many of the following projects [51]. In general, a protocol should include 1) a phantom or measurement setup and 2) a measurement process with evaluation methods. Furthermore, a good protocol [117, p.13] should provide evaluation and analysis of

* the basic quality criteria of tracking methods -- _Precision_: Deviation of measurements over a period of time while the sensor is fixed, also called jitter. -- _Accuracy_: Exactness of relative measurements, e.g., the distance between two measured positions.
* as well as extension to
* -- _Dynamic effects_: Impact on measurements when the sensor is moving during the measurement or when the environment is changing. -- _Magnetic field distortions_: Effect of potential disturbing environments, e.g., ferromagnetic materials or electronic devices on the magnetic field possibly resulting in tracking errors.

These characteristics of a tracking system should be assessed at different positions inside its tracking volume for all DoF of a specific system, which typically include

* _Position (3 DoF)_: location in 3-D space, e.g., [x,y,z];
* _Rotation (3 DoF)_: orientation in 3-D space, different representations possible, e.g., yaw-pitch-roll, quaternions, or Euler angles.

Unbiased representation of measurement data is another major challenge in the domain. For representation of precision,

Fig. 8: Image shows current example systems of the three manufacturers of stand-alone EM tracking systems (a–c). Calypso _GPS for the Body_ system, shown on the bottom right (d) includes the passive transport tracking technology, which is not available as stand-alone product. Photograph courtesy of (a) Northern Digital Inc., (b) Polhemus Inc., (c) Ascension Technology Corporation, and (d) Varian Medical Systems Inc.

the root mean square (rms) error is typically used [117, p.14]. For accuracy, usually statistical values such as mean error, standard deviation, median, minimum, maximum, and confidence intervals are quoted. To represent these values, some authors used boxplots (e.g., [39, 102]) others listed them in tables (e.g., [61, 196]). 3-D representations of errors also have been employed by simply plotting the measured points in a 3-D scene [102] or by more complex methods such as plotting of fitted polynomials [62]. While 3-D representation can be very helpful to overview the results, acquiring quantitative feedback is not easy. If the complete six DoF data is truly represented, it becomes too complex to perceive and understand, motivating the use of tables or diagrams in addition to 3-D figures.

Table II provides an overview of the distinctly different types of protocols. The most common approach is to use an accuracy board with drilled holes as a phantom. As ground truth, the distance between the holes is given from the construction data or from accurate _a priori_ measurements. "Seribbling" approaches are similarly popular. These employ a rigid body--containing typically two sensors--that can move freely on a plane board. The ground truth is the fact that all measurement values (should) lie in the same plane, and the changing measurement of the displacement between the fixed sensors provides an estimation of the errors. All these planar measurements should be repeated at various elevations within the working volume. Another possibility to cover a 3-D volume is to create a cube where a sensor can be placed in known 3-D positions inside. Most of the phantoms do not allow for assessment of dynamic aspects, but some proposed moving phantoms: a pendulum [60] and a turning plate [120]. More complex constructions were also used as phantoms for different reasons, a few examples are given in Table II.

Besides employing phantoms, some groups chose simpler methods, such as fixing the sensor on a ruler [83] or simply moving the sensor along straight lines on a sheet of paper [152]. While these approaches are simple and fast, their comparability and accuracy are very limited.

In addition to the relatively simple phantom-based approaches, some robots have also been included in studies. Automatic data collection for assessment allows for higher numbers of measurement points, and also potentially enables dynamic experiments. However, robots are problematic, because they typically present disturbing components to the workspace, and are more complex/expensive than conventional phantoms.

There are at least two protocols that were intended as "standardized protocol" to enable comparability between different assessment studies. Both protocols have been used for several studies and allow for a comprehensive presentation of their results (see Section IV-B).

1. **Hummel**_et al._[61] introduced a board phantom (50 cm \(\times\) 50 cm) with drilled holes at 90 possible sensor positions. The 5 cm distance between the positions is used as ground truth. On this board, only two of the three DoF for positional measurements are possible to be executed. Sirokai _et al._[170] and Maier-Hein _et al._[102] proposed an extension of the protocol by performing measurements on multiple elevations that extend the protocol to the missing DoF. The protocol also allows for rotational measurements for all three orientational DoF in the middle of the board and distortion assessment with metal probes. The proposed evaluation includes the precision as rms error, averaged over all 90 positions as well as the evaluation of mean positional and rotational errors.
2. **Wilson**_et al._[196, 206] introduced a cube phantom (\(18\) cm \(\times\) 18 cm \(\times\) 18 cm \(\times\) 18 cm) with 225 holes at different depths from 10 to 150 mm. The known positions inside the phantom which include variations in all three positional DoF are registered to the measured positions, and the error for each point is calculated. Statistical values, such as the rms error, are then determined to evaluate the accuracy. For the evaluation of precision, a maximal sample variability of the distance from the tracking system to the sensor is calculated.

### _Study Results_

Many studies assessing EM tracking systems for CAI can be found in the literature, e.g., [3, 6, 7, 15, 19, 25, 36, 39, 45, 51, 59, 60, 61, 66, 74, 82, 83, 86, 89, 102, 102, 102, 152, 154, 159, 165, 169, 170, 172, 196, 202, 206]. However, in many cases, the results of these studies are not comparable because different measurement protocols and evaluation methods were used. Thus, some groups pushed forward standardized assessment and several studies have been performed using these standardized protocols.

An overview of the study results of EM tracking assessment is given in Table III. The majority of the standardized studies used one of the most common devices, the NDI _Aurora_ and Ascension _microBird_, focusing on different clinical environments.

 Concerning precision, most assessments show promising results below 1.0 mm. Only Yaniv _et al._ found critical outliers for the Ascension _Short Range FG_[206]. In his thesis, Much [117] tested different sensors of the Ascension system and found outliers up to a couple of centimeters for one of them, referred to as _Model 130_, but the sensor _Model 180_ showed precise results, which are listed in Table III. Regarding environmental effects, studies show clearly that accuracy of EM tracking decreases dramatically in some clinical surroundings, such as on the patient stretcher in a CT suite [102, 206] or OR [196], as well as near medical devices such as a C-Arm [19]. Flat field generators such as the NDI Tabletop FG or the Ascension Flat FG shield the magnetic field from below and show much better results in some of these environments [206, 202]. Small FGs such as the Ascension Short Range FG and the NDI Compact FG also performed better [102, 206], probably because their smaller tracking volume is relatively far away from sources of distortion [102]. It should be mentioned that some FGs are suitable for being combined with other medical devices: Bo _et al._ combined the NDI Window FG with a C-Arm [19], and Franz _et al._ the NDI Compact FG with different US probes [39]. In both cases, these customizations improved the results of the assessments compared to the standard FG. However, Bo _et al._ still found a considerably high tracking error inside the C-Arm.

Unfortunately, there is less evidence for other tracking systems. We found some nonstandardized assessment studies for the Polhemus and Calypso systems and these are listed in Table III(c). One possibility to reasonably compare these results is to consider the error as a percentage of the measured distance, as did Day _et al._[25] who found jitter errors up to 5% and positional errors up to 3% for the Polhemus _Fastrak_ system. Birkfellner _et al._ compared the Polhemus _Isotrak II_ system to the Ascension Bird system and found the _Isotrak II_ to be more accurate but less robust against metallic distortions than the competing device [16]. Koerting assessed the _Isotrak II_ system in a thesis and found errors in the order of a couple of millimeters [82]. For the Calypso _GPS for the Body_ system Balter _et al._[6] and Santanam _et al._[159] found a precision that decreased with increasing distance from the FG but stayed far below 1%, and a positional error up to 5%. For other clinical systems, technical assessments are rare. Kwartowitz _et al._ compared the NDI _Aurora_ to the _CARTO XP_ system and found slightly better results for the latter with errors in the same magnitude [89]. Schicho _et al._ tested the _StealthStation Treon_ EM system and also found better results compared to the NDI _Aurora_[162]. Koivukangas _et al._ also performed a study with a _StealthStation_ system, comparing EM and optical tracking, and found a slightly better accuracy for the latter [79].

However, for most of these clinical systems, clinical trials have been performed and are further discussed in Section VI.

Automatic assessments basically confirm the results of other assessment protocols with higher numbers of acquired values. Shen _et al._ found increased positional errors up to 27 mm of the NDI _Aurora_ system near a patient stretcher in a CT suite but they only collected 36 positional measurements [169]. Gergel _et al._ used a tripod-shaped robot to examine 1000 positions inside the tracking volume of the NDI _Aurora_ system, also on a patient stretcher in a CT suite. Testing both the _NDI Planar FG_ and the _NDI Tabletop FG_ the results confirm the robustness of the latter against distortions from below [45]. Risholm _et al._ used a relatively small and inexpensive robot to collect 600 measurements in an OR suite that showed a highly disturbed field, and then applied compensation methods, see Section V [154]. Frantz _et al._ presented a method to collect data of random positions inside the tracking volume for accuracy assessment, which is the official approach of NDI to determine the accuracy of their tracking systems [38]. It should be noted that LEGO robots are another relatively cheap approach to perform robotic assessments [51]. This was done by Wu _et al._ who measured the accuracy of the NDI _Aurora_ System and they also used this data for calibration of the system, see Section V[202].

A problem not addressed in most of the assessment studies is the effect of sensor movement during the measurements; also referred to as dynamic effects (see Section III-E). For assessment of these effects Mor _et al._ moved two sensors, manually fixed on a wooden tool handle, and found the Ascension _microBird_ system was more affected by sensor movements than the NDI _Aurora_ system [114]. Hummel _et al._ proposed a more reproducible approach by attaching a sensor to a pendulum and found an increasing position error of up to 2.3 mm for increasing velocities up to 1.2 m/s [60]. Murphy _et al._ used a turning plate for assessment of sensor motion to the Calypso _GPS for the Body_ system but found no effects [120].

Another property of interest for many applications is the latency of the tracking signal. While this was not in the focus of most of the papers investigated here, several studies on the topic have been published. Adelstein _et al._ tested the Ascension _Flock of Birds_ and the Polhemus _Fastrack_ system with a motorized swing arm and found latencies of up to 50 ms for both systems using the default configuration. By disabling internal filtering of the tracking data the latency could be reduced to less than 10 ms [1]. Wu _et al._ assessed the latency of the NDI _Aurora_ system, and found it to be 80 ms higher than the latency of an optical tracking system [203]. Nafis _et al._ reported a latency of around 4 ms for Polhemus systems [121].

We caution however, that such results pertain to the systems in existence at the time (2003 and 2006, respectively), and may not be reflective of the performance of similar systems today. A couple of studies assessed the effects of metallic probes near EM tracking devices. Stainless steel and mild steel were found to cause the highest disturbance for Ascension systems [61, 128]. The NDI _Aurora_ and the Polhemus Fastrack also were disturbed by these metals, but the error was much lower [61, 74, 128]. Cobalt-chrome, titanium, bronze, and brass caused negligible distortions to all assessed EM tracking systems [61, 74, 110, 128]. However, in the case of aluminum, there have been contradictory statements as to whether this is disturbing [74] or not [61].

Additionally, there are some studies that assessed the effects of real medical instruments to EM tracking. Schicho _et al._ tested a Langenbeck hook, a dental drill and an US probe and found that the NDI _Aurora_ system is more sensitive to these instruments (error up to 5 mm) than the EM tracker of the Medtronic _StealthStation_ (error \(<\)1 mm) [162]. US probes also were assessed by Franz _et al._[39] and Hastenteufel _et al._[53], both of whom found that whether the EM tracking system was disturbed or not was highly dependent on the probe used. Patil _et al._ used the NDI _Aurora_ system inside an operating CT scanner and found increased distortions up to a couple of millimeters [132]. Poulin _et al._ placed different pieces of OR equipment near an Ascension _MotionStar_ system and found high distortions for an arthroscope, a oscillating saw, intra-venous monitoring equipment, positioning devices, scissors and an OR table. In contrast, for anesthesia equipment, including spreaders, a saw guide, an OR lamp, and the instrument table distortions were minimal [141]. Wegner _et al._ also found no relevant interferences caused by endoscopy instruments [188]. For the Calypso system, the influence of penile prostheses was tested and no measurable interference found [187].

### _Assessments in Clinical Practice_

In addition to technical assessments, there are studies that use more realistic settings to assess EM tracking in clinical practice. Phantoms of different anatomical structures such as the abdomen [199], the skull [165] and vessels [15] have been used. Some assessments have even been performed during actual interventions inside the human body [86, 172]. These types of studies are more realistic, and greatly show the potential and limitation of EM tracking on one hand but are less reproducible and comparable on the other.

The results from these studies indicate an error of up to a couple of millimeters in clinical practice [199]. The feasibility of tracking catheters, needles, and guide wires also has been shown [199]. For neurosurgical applications, an increased tracking error due to metallic instruments was found [165]. Although still experimental, Bien _et al._ successfully tracked a catheter by including a guide wire inside a vessel model [15].

Inside the human body, an accuracy assessment during total knee arthroplasty showed that optical tracking is more accurate than EM tracking [172]. Kruecker _et al._ found an error of 5.8 mm for tracking needles after percutaneous insertions into soft tissue [86]. However, beside these two exceptions, most studies with real patients were performed as clinical studies and are described in Section VI.

### _Discussion_

In summary, technical assessment shows that accurate EM tracking with errors smaller than 1 mm is possible in suitable surroundings. Under laboratory conditions, depending on the specific study, the standardized measurements with the NDI and Ascension systems found position errors always below 1.2 mm for distances of a couple of centimeters (Hummel-Protocol: 5 cm, Wilson-Protocol: \(<\)18 cm) leading to errors up to 2.4% of the measured value [see Tables III(a) and III(b)]. Nonstandardized studies assessing the Polhemus and Calypso systems are not really comparable, but also mostly stay below 3%, except for some outliers of up to 5% [see Table III(c)]. However, when operated in the vicinity of disturbing objects, such as many medical devices in clinical environments, the accuracy of these systems may drop dramatically. In possibly disturbed clinical surroundings, standardized studies found errors of up to 7.6 mm for the NDI and Ascension systems that represents nearly 10% of the measured value for some cases [see Tables III(a) and III(b)]. Table III shows an overview of recent studies and gives hints in which environments accuracy problems commonly occur. For some specific applications, customized EM field generators can help to avoid distortions and enable accurate EM tracking even in a complex environment. In this context, reduction of the size of the tracking volume can help to improve tracking accuracy as shown for different FGs [102] which leads to a trade-off between the size of the tracking volume and the accuracy within.

In the context of accuracy assessment, a direct comparison of EM tracking to optical tracking would also be of interest, but, even though some authors tested both systems in clinical environments and found better results for optical tracking (e.g., [79], [172], see Section VI-C), a similar standardized assessment for both technologies is not available. NDI, a manufacturer which sells both EM and optical tracking systems, published technical data obtained using the same method [189] for all their systems. Positional accuracies of 1.40 mm (NDI _Aurora_, EM tracking, five DoF), and 0.50 mm (NDI _Polaris_, optical tracking) as well as precisions of 0.70 mm and 0.25 mm respectively are available online.8 In addition, a technical study compared the same two NDI systems with a custom protocol and found a positional EM tracking error that increased by a factor of 4 compared to the optical system [40].

Footnote 8: _Aurora_:http://www.ndigital.com/medical/aurora-techspecs.php; _Polaris_: http://www.ndigital.com/medical/polarisfamily-techspecs.php

As shown in this section, there are various assessment protocols that have been presented in many different papers. A problem arising here is the lack of comparability between these studies. Fortunately, there have been efforts to introduce standardized protocols. Two of these protocols already have been applied in several studies, resulting in some evidence for EM tracking in different clinical environments. These studies focus on the most common EM tracking devices from NDI and Ascension, as shown in Table III. However, it should be noted that comparability between the studies is still limited. For example, there are known differences between single models of sensor type series and often the studies even use different sensor types. Of course, the results of one device type cannot simply be assigned to another type, because there could be differences in the behavior of the tracking techniques, for example, between ac and dc field generation, and in the technical specifications such as the tracking volume (see Section III).

Besides phantom-based approaches, which include the standardized protocols, robotic/automatic assessment methods have been proposed by different authors. The advantage of these is the ability to collect a large number of samples automatically within a short time. The drawbacks of robotic assessment protocols include the added cost and complexity, as well as the possibility that the device itself might disturb EM tracking. Nevertheless, the use of robotic devices is reasonable when large data sets are required, or when the same measurements must be repeated many times, as in the case of compensation/calibration approaches, which are discussed in Section V. All in all, for single assessments of EM tracking devices, one of the standardized phantom-based approaches should be the method of choice. These are simple to apply and enable comparability of the results.

Considering the presented protocols in more detail, rotational measurement appears as an important issue. Many approaches, including protocols that rigidly register the measured positions to a ground truth, such as the standardized Wilson-Protocol [195], only change the position of the sensors but not the orientation for assessment, so that only three of the five or six DoF are analyzed. The standardized Hummel-Protocol introduces rotational measurements by using special holes arranged in a circle in the middle of the board [61]. However, Maier-Hein _et al_. reported problems with these measurements due to cable flipping [102]. Thus, a simple, easy to apply standardized solution for rotational measurements can be considered as an open research problem. Enhancement of the standardized protocols using such a method would be of great benefit. However, it should be noted that if orientation changes and positional and rotational errors need to be assessed simultaneously, hand-eye calibration would be necessary and this might introduce new sources of error [149].

Dynamic measurements also are not provided by the current standardized protocols, although several studies assessed dynamic effects with special phantoms [60, 120]. Another possibility would be to use robots for dynamic measurements because they can precisely reproduce defined movements. A question that arises in this context is the effect of latency and update rates. LaScalza _et al_. found that the error of the _Ascension Flock of Birds_ system caused by disturbing metals depends on the update rate [92] and further investigation of these effects might be of interest for the future.

Some authors proposed to assess and evaluate the different DoF of a system separately, e.g., [6]. However, the standardized protocols mostly provide measures that usually are averaged over three positional DoF. As described in Section IV-A, the protocols do not always include equivalent variations in all three positional DoF which keeps them simple and easy to apply.

So, even if possible, covering every single effect in a controlled technical experiment can be very time consuming. At some point, experiments should be transferred into an actual clinical environment [63, 137, Ch. 18]. Many researchers employed a relatively simple protocol, such as a standardized one, and performed measurements in clinical environments to check the feasibility of EM tracking, see Table III. This is the approach recommended by the authors, as it is important to evaluate EM tracking for the specific clinical application and we believe EM tracking is now robust enough for many clinical applications.

## V Distortion Compensation

Since the early days of the field, improving the accuracy of EM tracking has been a core research problem. This is well represented in the literature that was found during the literature search as described in Section II. The findings of 31 publications include six patents, which shows the potential for commercial applications in this field.

The compensatable EM errors (see Section III-E) may originate in the design of the FG [139], the imperfect manufacturing of the sensors, or may originate from external EM sources [62]. Compensation of these EM errors refers to the systematic action and effort to eliminate them.

Typically, system-level and FG calibration is performed by the developer/manufacturer, and verified by thorough testing before shipping [14]. Sensors are also calibrated and matched against their descriptive definition files. When new sensors, markers, or fiducials are (custom) built, they must be recalibrated [65]. Finally, calibration also can mean the assessment and compensation of the EM field distortions in a given environment [71]. Regarding the latter, the two fundamental approaches of accuracy improvement include 1) _passive protection_ and 2) _active compensation_.

 

### _Passive Protection_

This may incorporate the overall optimization of the tracker setup, the arrangement of the experiment, and the employment of shielding. Since a large portion of the distortions originate from external ferromagnetic objects and EM sources in the vicinity of the generator, removing all disturbing objects is crucial for better performance. The literature points out that the entire setup should be located remotely from electric wires (that may be running in the walls) and sensor cables always should be separated from power cables and preferably unrolled [170].

Manufacturres implement various methods to improve passive protection; such an example is the _Flat FG_ or _Tabletop FG_ (see Section III-D), where the EM field is protected from below by a metallic shield. Shielding should be employed when an EM tracking system is integrated with a C-arm or other imaging device [48]. The sensors themselves also may be protected and insulated. An additional protective coil may reduce the effect of eddy currents [27]. Recent studies found that the tabletop arrangement reduced the error by 63%-70% in the CT suite [102, 206]. NDI offers shielded sensors for better integration with critical equipment, such as electrophysiology mapping and ablation catheters (NDI Shielded and Isolated 5DOF Sensor, Part Number: 610057).9 In the meantime, the clinical workflow also should support the utilization of EM tracking. Most often, the tools are moved only when the most disturbing effect, for example, imaging devices such as a fluoroscope, or electric surgical equipment, such as an oscillating saw [141], is turned off. The overall shielding of the measurement setup also is possible, however, only against large, external sources of distortion.

Footnote 9: http://www.ndigital.com/medical/aurora-accessories.php

### _Active Compensation_

For active compensation, usually tracking data is acquired on different poses inside the tracking volume of a possibly disturbed tracking device, e.g., [45, 154]. Additionally, reference ground truth to these poses is available, e.g., from an additional optical tracking system [31, 45]. Based on these data, compensation is achieved by employing a certain mathematical method to assess the EM field within the workspace, then directly correlating the measured and the reference values using mathematical functions and subtracting the systematic error from the measurement. Based on the resolution of the raster used as reference points, different methods can be identified.

* Point-based: the most simple methods, relating every point-of-interest to a nearby, previously measured point, e.g., by employing a look up table (LUT).
* Interpolation: local (e.g., trilinear) or global [62] interpolation allows the computation of the compensation factor between known, measured points.
* Extrapolation: computes compensation for points outside the raster measured, but with typically lower accuracy, making it rarely used in EMT.

Table IV provides an overview of these alternatives. By far the most popular method is interpolation, for which various techniques have been researched, from polynomial fitting to multi-quadric methods, shape functions, and neural networks. A detailed survey is provided by Kindratenko _et al._[72].

One of the major challenges with error calibration is the _a priori_ data collection to acquire the reference measurements. It is considered extremely problematic to integrate any general, pattern-based data collection method into clinical workflows. Large calibration phantoms and robots are undesired and often impossible to introduce into the sterile environment prior to the intervention to perform the calibration measurements. This procedure also may have the drawback of being too time consuming and costly.

Collection methods include continuous, discrete modes; analogous to the methods presented in Section IV, both manual and automated [45]. Frequently, multi-sensor rigid bodies and sensor arrays are used to assess the field in real-time [68, 166, 167, 168].

Error corrections also can be performed with respect to a more precise tracking device. The reference measurement may come from an independent localizer (i.e., a high resolution optical tracker, a physical localizer), or a phantom with knownphysical parameters can be employed, trusting the precision of the manufacturing.

The error compensation can be performed _online_ during the use of the tracking system, based on another independent tracking system or multiple sensor coils' data (e.g., [177, 202]). Note that in this case some authors proposed the generation of an error map in advance [177], others aim at the acquisition of this map intra-operatively [124, 202]. The method of Feuerstein _et al._ does not require an error map at all, but a calibration of the used instrument instead [31, 32].

More typically, an _offline calibration_ procedure is performed. Published studies have shown a mean error reduction of 4%-22% [16, 57, 26]. Either way, the method should be repeatable, and should be performed quickly, immediately following the calibration, and without interfering with the medical procedure taking place at the same location (see Section VI).

### _Discussion_

EM tracker calibration had long been seen as the Holy Grail for clinical applications, since the inherent accuracy of systems used to fall an order of magnitude behind that of the optical trackers. However, in recent years, the newer generation FGs exhibited better accuracy (see Section IV) due to improved materials, production techniques, and system design, and because a great deal of research was invested in the optimization of coil arrangement or through patented technologies [2].

System-level calibration must be performed in a structured manner. As discussed in Section III-E, the mean and STD components of an error should be treated separately. While averaging and smoothing (e.g., using Kalman filters) can work against jitter, the static error needs a more systematic approach for alleviation. Most calibration techniques target the static error using distortion field assessment, mapping, and compensation, yet without measuring the overall error beforehand.

There is a clear cost-benefit consideration to be made regarding calibration for each clinical setup or research installation. While some degree of improvement in spatial accuracy can always be achieved by calibration, the time and additional effort this procedure requires may not be considered worth the effort. This is especially true in the case of clinical applications, in which the total time spent in the operating room for the procedure is a key performance indicator, and setup time, including distortion field mapping for compensation, should be minimized. Manufacturers might argue that static calibration methods are more realistic and feasible regarding clinical applications, and static measurements may be taken during every system installation and also periodically to maintain a certain level of accuracy. However, real-time model-based assessment and calibration of the whole EM field is neither practical nor achievable, since too many disturbing effects would need be modeled and included in the equations.

Similarly, it can be assumed that performing dynamic calibrations makes sense only to the extent that the user may acquire a better understanding of the systems' baseline performance. For some applications, the velocity-dependent error might be considered as important, as it indicates a limit of speed for clinical motions.

Calibration should be considered at the system level. Where most accuracy improvement can be achieved, that particular area should be targeted. For example, if the jitter is significantly larger than the static distortion, calibration will not be of much help. The same is true if the patient's image is of low quality, the registration is performed poorly, or the instruments are not calibrated properly [63]. At the end of the day, the clinicians using the EM tracking systems will be the ones to affirm the usability of the tool, with accuracy being a critical component, but also soft requirements other than pure target numbers may be important.

It is worth noting that in many procedures, the absolute accuracy of tracking (relative to a world coordinate system) defined by the FG, is secondary to the accuracy of the position of an instrument relative to another. Such a situation occurs in many instances when navigating an instrument relative to a tracked imaging source, such as an endoscope [23] or an ultrasound transducer [113]. In these cases, any constant bias that may be introduced into the environment will affect both devices. Consequently, the relative accuracy between two sensors may be much higher than the absolute value relative to FG.

## VI Clinical Applications

There are many possible applications for EM tracking in medicine and there are commercial systems also available for some of them. Whenever line-of-sight to instruments is unavailable, EM tracking becomes the method of choice for localization. However, although many studies on EM-based CAI systems have been published, the evidence regarding the clinical outcome is variable between different applications. Based on the 79 papers found during the literature research as described in Section II, a range of applications was identified and are presented in this section. An overview of these commercial systems is given later in this section and the clinical evidence on the different applications is summarized.

### _Range of Application_

According to the findings in the literature, EM tracking has been widely used in clinical applications. An overview is given in Table V. EM tracking is always the method of choice when line-of-sight to the instrument is an issue. Numerous papers present EM-based CAI methods for minimally invasive interventions in the areas of percutaneous punctures, catheter applications, and endoscopic applications. However, in some cases EM tracking was also used for open surgery or other medical applications.

Percutaneous procedures, performed for diagnosis (e.g., biopsy) or treatment (e.g., ablation) are possible on different parts of the human body. Computer-assisted approaches are usually performed under US or CT guidance [84, 135], but MRI, fluoroscopy, or positron emission tomography (PET) guidance, as well as combinations of these are also possible [183]. Krucker _et al._ and Wallace _et al._ performed patient studies of EM navigated punctures to many different organs/structures such as liver, lung, spine, kidney, adrenal gland, pancreas, lymph nodes, and pelvis [85, 186]. Other publications mostly focus on one intervention, such as navigated punctures into the liver [205], the lung [47] or less commonly, the spine [197]. However, in the domain of percutaneous punctures, line-of-sight is available in many cases, so optical tracking should be kept as a robust and accurate alternative for instrument and patient localization [198]. The trade-off between the different tracking technologies should be considered, depending on the needs of a specific application.

Catheter interventions which are possible in the human circulatory system are part of modern medical care. These commonly include a guidewire to steer the catheter inside the vessel tree. Diameters of guidewires are in the order of 1 mm or less which makes it hard to include sensors. However, most of the recent studies on catheter applications with EM tracking do not track guidelines, but track catheters without guidewires, which offer a larger diameter to include sensors. Most studies deal with catheterizations into the heart to perform cardiac mapping or ablation [97]. It should be noted that the frequently used term _magnetic navigation_ may be misleading in this relation. It is part of the term _remote magnetic navigation_ (RMN) that describes a method to steer a catheter by means of permanent magnets instead of the guidewire, but not to localize it [178]. To make things even more confusing, RMN is sometimes combined with EM tracking to localize the steerable catheter during the intervention [178]. Other catheter applications using EM tracking are rare in the literature, but there are examples of aortic [103], neurovascular [4], and vena cava catheterizations [171]. Transplantit intrahepatic portosystemic stent shunting (TIPSS) was also tested in a phantom trial [95]. For catheter interventions, EM tracking often is the only technology to localize the instruments when line-of-sight is not available. However, the need for a cable connection to the sensor is still a problem for these types of interventions, because it usually blocks the catheter and does not allow the use of guidewires. Recently, new methods to include EM sensors into guidewires have been presented but were only tested in phantoms so far [24].

Endoscopes offer a much larger diameter than catheters, making EM tracking easier to apply. Most studies were found on computer-assisted bronchoscopy, where the bronchoscope can be navigated through the bronchial tree by localizing the tip and registering preoperative data, for example CT to patient [94]. Laparoscopic interventions such as lung brachytherapy [96] or radio frequency ablation (RFA) [56] also have been performed. In the case of otolaryngologic (ENT) surgery, endoscopes have been localized using EM tracking to apply navigation under US/CT guidance [41, 184]. Colonoscopes have been tracked by means of an integrated sensor to visualize the path of the instrument during the intervention [175]. Thus, tracking endoscopes during an intervention seems to be a reasonable application for EM tracking and is feasible with the current technology. However, establishing clinical use of these systems is often hindered by other problems, which are discussed in Sections VI-C and VI-D. One system that has been described recently [113] has demonstrated utility for navigation during intracardiac mitral valve repair. This system relies on the relative accuracy between the position of an instrument and the imaging ultrasound transducer. Also, because it is concerned only with the safe navigation of the instrument to the site where image-guided repair will take place, (rather than guiding the entire procedure, including the action on the target that is achieved under local real-time ultrasound guidance) the accuracy of instrument positioning relative to the US image needs only to be in the range of 3-5 mm [97].

In the case of open surgery, EM tracking has been used for some specific applications. For instance, it is an interesting option for enabling computer assistance during intramedullary nailing, a special bone fracture therapy in which the nail is inserted into the bone while line-of-sight is blocked [58]. Additionally, one study tested EM tracking in comparison to optical tracking for bone surgery [98]. Knee/hip arthroplasty has also been performed using EM tracking in comparison to optical tracking [99]. Computer-assistance for neurosurgery is well developed in clinical practice, but mostly mechanical or optical tracking is used [49, 75]. Although high accuracies are required, which usually points to optical tracking as method of choice, a few researchers have navigated neurosurgical interventions using EM tracking [134, 174]. In some cases, namely placement of depth electrodes for epilepsy treatment [200] or catheter placement in the cerebral ventricular system [155], line-of-sight is blocked and so EM tracking is the only option to track the instrument. EM tracking also was used during open liver surgery in combination with an optical tracking system [10]. Hence, some specific cases in open surgery in which line-of-sight is blocked, also seem a field of application for EM tracking.

Remote virtual sonography (RVS) involves fusion of US and CT/MRI images and is often achieved by tracking the US probe using EM technology [112]. This technique is sometimes used for guidance of punctures without tracking the puncture needle itself, but instead using conventional US-guidance for needle insertion. Another possibility is to use this technology for noninvasive diagnosis, such as for breast cancer [126]. Some manufacturers offer such RVS systems that include EM tracking, see Section VI-B. US probes also have been tracked electromagnetically to enable 3-D US by combining multiple 2-D US scans from different directions into a 3-D image [33]. Especially for laparoscopic US, this approach was proposed by several groups, [42, 190] because line-of-sight is unavailable. This excludes optical tracking and the probes must be small, which makes it hard to use other techniques for 3-D US, such as special 3-D probes.

In the case of radiotherapy, EM tracking is used for localization of tumors and surrounding critical structures, such as in and near the prostate [37]. Placement of feeding tubes is another application in which EM tracking is frequently used [129]. There also have been some feasibility studies published for speech production research [83] and back pain diagnosis [152] that used EM tracking to localize bodily parts.

As shown in Table V, there are publications on most of the areas of application for EM tracking that seem reasonable. However, most of the presented systems are still very complex to apply, hindering widespread clinical use see Section VI-D. Thus, practical and simple solutions that are applicable in clinical workflow still are missing for most of the applications, and this should be considered as the main challenge in this area.

 

### _Commercial Systems_

The literature on EM tracking included more than 20 commercial systems based on EM tracking technology. Products such as _Cath-Finder_ (Pharmacia Deltec Inc., St. Paul, MN, USA) and _CathTrack_ (C.R. Bard Inc., Murray Hill, NJ, USA) were introduced in the early 1990s, but localization was only possible in 2-D, and accuracy was in the order of 1 cm [138]. Later, more accurate systems were presented that allowed real in-body navigation. For percutaneous functions, the US-guided _Ultraguide_ system (Ultraguide Ltd., Yokneam, Israel, _out of business since 2003_) [18] and the CT-guided _Magellan_ system (Biosense Webster Inc., Diamond Bar, CA, USA) [123] are some early examples that are now unavailable. In the case of neurosurgery, _NEN-NeuroGuard_ (Nicolet Biomedical, Madison, WI, USA) is another historical device from the late 1990s [174]. The failures of these systems may be attributed to various reasons, including the complexity of such navigation approaches in general, and specific robustness problems of EM tracking. Although some improvements were developed, these problems cannot be considered as solved and will be described for current systems in this review.

Today, many devices are available using EM tracking, some of which have seen multiple generations. For needle punctures, the _Veran ig4_ (GE Healthcare, Chalfont St. Giles, Buckinghamshire, U.K.) [160] and the _Cappa C-Nav_ (Siemens AG, Erlangen, Germany) [135] are examples of such systems. The _StealthStation AxiEM_ (Medtronic Inc., Fridley, MN, USA) is a similar system that also can be used for punctures [200], but also for a wider area of application, such as knee surgery [99]. _StealthStation_ and _Cappa_ also have the ability to perform optical tracking. It is notable that the latter system has abandoned the use of EM tracking; an indication perhaps of the low level of clinical uptake of this procedure. For fluoroscopic interventions, the _GE OEC 9800 Plus/Fluorotrak_ system (GE Healthcare) is available and offers real-time visualization of a catheter behind a frozen fluoroscopy image [185]. RVS is supported by the systems _LOGIQ E9_ (GE Healthcare) [205] and _Fusion_ (Medtronic) [184]. Another company, Hitachi _Authorized licensed use limited to: Escuela Superior de lingerate Mecanica_. Downloaded (Hitachi Ltd. Corp., Tokio, Japan) offers a RVS extension for their products. In all these cases of RVS, US probes are tracked electromagnetically [77].

Navigation systems for cardiac catheter mapping are the _CARTO XP_ (Biosense Webster) [89] and the _MediGuide_ (St. Jude Medical, St. Paul, MN, USA). For this application, no additional imaging data is necessary because only the position of the catheter tip is needed. However, Biosense Webster also offers the possibility for navigation in combination with fluoroscopy images. _CARTO RMT_ (Biosense Webster) is a cardiac mapping/navigation system specially designed as an extension for the Stereotaxis RMN system (Stereotaxis Inc., St. Louis, MO, USA) [163].

Navigated bronchoscopy is supported by the _iLogic_ system (superDimension Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) that offers guidance by means of preoperative CT data [94].

In radiation therapy, the Calyposo _GPS for the Body_ system (Calyposo, Seattle, WA, USA) is designed to track tumor and surrounding critical structures by implanted sensors, referred toas _beacons_. The Calypso tracking technology differs from other EM tracking systems (see Section III) in not requiring cable connection to the sensors. So the _beacons_ stay implanted and may be used for multiple radiation therapy sessions.

For neurosurgical and ENT interventions _InstaTrak_ (GE Healthcare) is a system that uses EM tracking to visualize preoperative CT data relative to the instrument [78].

Recently, some new systems appeared on the market to cover new areas of application. The _ScopeGuide_ system (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) tracks the shape of the colonoscope during a colonoscopy and visualizes the instrument in 3-D, which is helpful in the case of loops [175]. For feeding tube placement the _CORTRAK_ system (CORPAK Medsystems, Buffalo Grove, IL, USA) uses a transmitter inside the feeding tube and a mobile receiver unit attached to the torso of the patient [81]. For intramedullary nailing, the _TRIGEN SURESHOT_ system (Smith&Nephew) tracks the intramedullary nail and uses a mobile FG to guide a drill [58].

Some systems were recently introduced for US-guided punctures. The _Virtual Navigator_ (Esaote) enables needle navigation under US guidance using preoperative CT data. A similar approach is followed by the _SonixGPS_ system (Ultrasonix, Richmond, BC, Canada), the PercuNav system (Philips Healthcare, Hamburg, Germany), and a needle navigation extension of the _LOGIQ E9_ system. The _eTRAX_ Needle Guidance System (Civco) is more focused on EM tracked needles, but also offers navigation software.

### _Clinical Evidence_

An overview on relevant clinical evidence related to EM Navigation is given in Table VI and Fig. 9. Most clinical evidence was found for EM navigated bronchoscopy (ENB), where the _iLogic_ is the most common system. This is the only domain in which review papers are available [9, 29, 94]. The main advantage of ENB is reduced radiation, because EM tracking can replace fluoroscopy most of the time [94]. Drawbacks are the extended costs of this technique, and the fact that no improvement of diagnostic yield compared to the conventional method has yet been demonstrated [94]. Motion compensation is an important issue, because the lung is affected by breathing motion [44]. In spite of the number of studies in this area, there still is a lack of high level evidence such as comparative studies [94].

There have been many studies relating to EM tracking for percutaneous punctures. However, a comparison of these efforts is difficult, because different imaging modalities (US, CT, PET, or combinations of) were used, and the applied commercial systems also differ between these studies. Moreover, the results are not consistent for all parameters. Grand _et al._, for example, found no improvements, but an increased procedure time compared to the conventional approach using the CT-guided system _Veran ig4_[47]. In contrast, Narsule _et al._ found a decreased procedure time for the same system [127]. Motion of the target structure is a problem for some percutaneous interventions, mostly due to breathing during punctures in the field of the abdomen. Motion compensation may be beneficial in this area [198]. Some studies determined the overall targeting accuracy of navigated punctures, which is shown in Table VII. A mean accuracy of 6 mm and below seems feasible for good systems.

Feeding tube placement by nasogastric intubation was the focus of a few studies in which the relatively new _CORTRAK_ system showed very promising results. No endoscope was necessary, the procedure was faster and less costly, and no drawbacks were reported [105, 106, 81, 129]. An earlier study that used a different system also showed promising results [192].

Concerning virtual sonography (RVS), which is used for diagnosis and puncture guidance, a better detection rate for breast tumors was found compared to conventional US/MRI combined diagnosis [126]. In a study investigating the detection of the ablation area after RFA, contrast enhanced sonography seemed to be a good alternative to RVS [76].

For ENT surgery, the _InstaTrak_ system was tested in several patient studies. Compared to another system with optical tracking, Metson _et al._ found no significant differences [108]. Other studies did not include a control group and a comparison to conventional ENT surgery was missing. Among the advantages of EM navigation, the authors listed accurate structure localization during the intervention [184, 78] and fast setup time[41]. As drawbacks, high costs and thus low availability of such systems were reported [184].

In radiotherapy, the Calypso _GPS for the body_ system was tested in several studies. Although the results were promising because of better quality of life outcome and a reduced mortality [157], more prospective validation is needed [90].

EM navigated arthroplasty on the knee or the hip using the _StealthStation AxiEM_ system was the focus of three clinical studies. In this area, optical tracking is commonly used, so all these studies compared the EM-based system to one of the optical systems, but no significant differences were found [176, 179].

For cardiac catheterization, Kim _et al._ found a reduced fluoroscopy time when using the _CARTO XP_ system [70]. Most of the other studies used RMN in combination with EM tracking, focusing on RMN. Drawbacks, such as the fact that navigation is not allowed for patients with pacemakers, may occur when

Fig. 9: Shows the number of clinical studies with EM tracking based CAI systems per clinical application found during the literature research.

 using RMN. The results mostly cannot be attributed to the use of EM tracking.

In neurosurgery the _NEN-NeuroGuard_ system was subject to studies in 2001-2002 [134, 174, 208], but the system meanwhile disappeared from the market and current navigation systems for neurosurgery use optical tracking [49]. However, there are some newer studies that tested EM tracking in neurosurgery, although they focus on very specific applications such as radio-frequency thermocoagulation [22] or depth electrode placement [200].

All other applications were either single clinical studies, or less evidence-based case reports or phantom/animal trials.

### _Discussion_

As shown above, a wide range of applications has been tested using computer-assisted methods based on EM tracking. However, problems with accuracy and robustness (see Section IV) raise the question whether these drawbacks should be accepted if alternative modalities, such as optical tracking devices, are available. A few clinical studies directly compared EM with optical tracking and confirmed the better accuracy and robustness of the latter [172, 99, 153]. Optical systems mainly are used for neurosurgery [49, 75], and it is perhaps not surprising that the EM-based system _NEN-Neuroguard_ quickly disappeared from the market. Most of the current EM-based navigation systems cover applications for which line-of-sight cannot be established, making optical tracking infeasible.

Many publications on the clinical utility of EM tracking are available, but most are feasibility studies performed on phantoms or animals, and clinical studies are rare. Review papers only are available for ENB applications, but even there the authors complain of the lack of high level evidence by prospective comparative studies [94]. As shown by assessments of EM tracking devices (see Section IV), tracking accuracy suffers in some clinical environments, although this fact is not clearly reflected by the published clinical evidence. Possibly, problematic applications already fail in a phantom state and/or are not published due to publication bias [28]. Thus, one must be very careful when applying EM-based navigation systems in a new clinical environment.

Besides all known problems of EM tracking, navigation failures also can be caused by other factors. In this context, a clear distinction between the terms _tracking_ and _navigation_ is necessary. Tracking, as discussed at length in this paper, is the technology to localize instruments, and it is only one component of a medical navigation system. When analyzing such systems more errors of other components, due to such aspects as image-to-patient registration, calibration or operator errors can easily exceed the error of the tracking sub-system. For example, physiological motion (e.g., due to breathing or heartbeats, which can corrupt the image-to-patient registration) is a serious problem for abdominal interventions [198]. Thus, for most CAI systems, an error model [54] helps to understand possible error sources and estimate risks for clinical application. This information could help to estimate the required minimal accuracy of a tracking system to meet the needs of a specific navigation task. However, typically in the case of instrument navigation, the errors are usually in the order of a couple of millimeters, see e.g., Table VII, and for such applications, sub-millimeter tracking accuracies are needed to assure that the tracking error does not dominate the overall whole system accuracy.

Another possible reason for the lack of evidence is the fact that clinical trials with research prototypes are difficult. It becomes easier if commercial devices are available that are already approved as medical devices. More than 20 of such systems have been presented (see Section VI-B), with most having been used for clinical studies and demonstrating acceptable results. In addition, the manufacturers are obligated to carry out essential performance tests (and sometimes accuracy assessments) to get legal approvals for their systems in most countries. In this context it is worth mentioning that the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) lately published a protocol for surgical navigation system accuracy under the title "Standard Practice for Measurement of Positional Accuracy of Computer Assisted Surgical Systems" (ASTM F2554-10).

However, none of the commercial systems has reached wide clinical use, and some have already disappeared from the market. This could be attributed to the high costs and added complexity when compared to conventional approaches, which is manifested through the following drawbacks of EM tracking:

* need for cables to connect sensors;
* expensive sensors and reusing them is complex;
* technical problems of EM tracking (e.g., no patients with pacemakers, no metal near the tracking system);
* need for additional hardware, especially the FG, which leads to long setup times in clinical practice.

These drawbacks must be compensated for by real clinical benefits to achieve widespread use of a system. Additionally, factors influencing clinical utility--such as distance to large-scale medical devices (e.g., CT scanners) that might influence the tracking accuracy--have to be considered [206]. Taking these factors into account, a system must be integrated seamlessly into the clinical workflow to find acceptance in practice. In this respect, a particular problem arises for interventions that take place in or near an MRI suite. So far, no EM tracking system is ready for use inside strong external magnetic or electromagnetic fields, such as those originated by an MRI scanner.

Nevertheless, some new commercial systems have appeared on the market recently and show promising results in the first clinical studies. The _ScopeGuide_ (Olympus) for colonoscopy, _CORTRAK_ (CORPAK) for feeding tube placement, and _TRIGEN SURESHOT_ (Smith&Nephew) are examples of systems that open new applications for CAI by the use of EM tracking. The latter two use relatively small mobile FGs attached to the patient. This approach is promising because it makes the system more robust against field distortions [102].

 Results also show that the _CORTRAK_ system is adding real clinical benefit by reducing time and cost of a feeding tube placement [129].

## VII Summary and Outlook

As shown in this review, more than 300 studies related to EM tracking in medicine currently have been published. Fig. 10 shows the findings per annum subdivided into the four areas: _Fundamentals_ (Section III), _Assessment_ (Section IV), _Compensation_ (Section V) and _Clinical Applications_ (Section VI). The number of publications per year has increased from below 10 in the early 1990s to 50 in 2012. In clinical applications, including clinical studies, the number has been growing steadily since 2004 and has recently led to the first review papers in the field, which indicates the growing interest in the technology. While there are only three different manufacturers of standalone EM tracking systems, we found that 24 different commercial systems for medicine based on EM tracking have appeared. Although not all manufacturers describe their tracking technology in detail, some of them have clearly integrated one of the stand-alone systems, while others have developed their own solutions. We identified three fundamentally different EM tracking technologies (ac EM tracking, dc EM tracking, passive transponders), as described in Section III, which have been evaluated in more than 60 assessment studies. Some of them use standardized, comparable assessment protocols that allow for interesting comparisons of the results, as shown in Table III. It was noted that the robustness of EM tracking suffers from nearby metallic objects, which are often part of the clinical environment. In addition, more than 40 studies presented and evaluated methods to compensate for these errors as described in Section V. Finally, some manufacturers have also developed systems that can be used in environments such as those with a metal operating room table, and this is one possible solution for those environments.

However, until now, no CAI system based on EM tracking has reached widespread clinical use, perhaps indicating the difficulty of integrating this technology into the clinical environment. The question naturally arises: How will EM tracking develop in the future? What developments are needed to improve robustness and accelerate clinical application?

In general, EM tracking still is the best established method of tracking when no line-of-sight is available [137, Ch. 2]. To date, no universally applicable alternative has been presented, and if this stays unchanged, EM tracking will remain an important technology, despite the known drawbacks. Besides the technical drawbacks, such as the lack of robustness (see Section IV) and the need for additional hardware (see Section III), cost also may be a factor to be considered. While EM tracking is generally less expensive than optical tracking, it requires specially constructed tools with a trackable embedded sensor. However, given the costs of other disposable items such as ablation catheters, this may not be a limiting factor. Reusable sensors currently are not practical for many cases and may lead to issues of sterilisability and fatigue of materials, causing the sensors to break or provide false measurements.

In the field of standalone medical EM tracking systems, there are still very few manufacturers. One of these, Ascension, was recently bought by NDI, leaving only two manufacturers: NDI and Polhemus (see Section III-F). Since many patents in this area remain (see Section III-C [138]), more vendors may arise if EM tracking finds widespread use which might lead to a stronger competition in the market and thus better products.

Besides stand-alone EM tracking systems, manufacturers who develop their own systems as part of CAI products should also be considered [104]. Unfortunately, these tracking systems may be difficult for researchers to access.

From a technical perspective, there are actual technical differences between the different tracking systems (see Section III-C). While the pros and cons of the ac and dc EM tracking technologies are similar (see Section III and Section IV), the passive transponder technology offers an interesting advantage--the transponders are small and wireless. Unfortunately, the only working passive transponder system is integrated into a complex medical product--the Calypso system [104], which covers only a small tracking volume (see Section III-C) and is not available as a standalone tracking device [104]. Other research groups and manufacturers are working on passive transponder tracking systems, one example being based on RFID technology [158], but at the time of writing, all are at an early stage and not yet capable of tracking with high (mm) accuracy [158]. Hopefully, these systems will become functional, robust, and accurate in the near future and this might open new possibilities for EM tracking. If so, the next step would be to evaluate them carefully (preferably by using a standardized protocol) and compare them with the currently available systems. Some nonstandardized assessments of the Calypso system (see Section IV-B) already are available and providing promising results [159].

Given the issues mentioned above, the question arises whether fundamentally different technologies are needed to achieve feasible tracking without line-of-sight. Some authors presented approaches to combine EM tracking with other technologies, such as image registration [115, 173] or localization using accelerometers [101]. Recently, the NDI Compact FG (see Section III-D) was combined with a robot plus an addi

Fig. 10: Publications per year from the literature research of this review. Lower boxes mark some important milestones.

 tional optical tracking system to constantly move the FG such that the sensor stays in a central area of the EM field where accuracy is best [149]. Alternatives to completely replace EM tracking have been proposed when additional information of the tracked instrument is available, such as a color or range image of an endoscope [80, 116]. In these cases, camera pose estimation algorithms can be used to track the position of an instrument relative to the region of interest. Another possibility is fiber-optic based tracking [130] such as the systems presented by Luna Innovations Inc. (Roanoke, VA, USA) [30]. Besides these, real-time medical imaging modalities such as fluoroscopy also can be used for image-based tracking algorithms [5, 133]. However, all these tracking technologies are quite specific and not generally applicable. Most of the technologies are still in an early stage and/or are not robust enough for clinical use. Nevertheless, EM tracking seems to be the most advanced technology, reflected by the fact that we found no medical products included in any of the other tracking technologies.

Regarding error compensation of EM tracking, much work has already been published (see Section V), but few of the methods are practical in a clinical situation. Some approaches propose additional calibration procedures (see Section V), but most CAI systems add complexity to clinical workflows even without these additional procedures. If such approaches are needed to improve EM tracking in the future, they should be simple and easy to use, preferably without any user interaction. A very useful feature in this context that might be easier to implement would be to track error detection, so that the system would be able to issue a warning if accuracy was compromised at any given moment [118]. This would make systems much safer in practice.

A more widely used approach to avoid errors is customization of EM tracking systems. For example, if the EM field is shielded using a special design or if the tracking volume is limited to a small area of interest, fewer tracking errors will occur in practice [102]. Some commercial systems already use customized EM tracking systems and the results of the first studies look very promising (see Section VI-C).

The robustness of EM tracking may cause some concerns, but this issue can be addressed with careful verification in actual clinical environments. New customized EM tracking systems should be evaluated carefully, in the same way as classical systems, and this will accelerate standardization. The current standardized protocols provide a good starting point, but some drawbacks have been reported and they should be extended to cover all relevant aspects, such as rotational errors and dynamic effects [102]. It is notable that several prominent research groups10 have formed a joint initiative to provide the community with a unified approach to system assessment that should be published in the near future.

Footnote 10: Austrian Center for Medical Innovation and Technology (Wiener Neustadt, Austria), Budapest University of Technology and Economics, Department of Control Engineering and IT (Budapest, Hungary), Children’s National Medical Center, Sheikh Zayed Pediatric Surgical Innovation Institution (Washington, DC, USA), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Division of Medical and Biological Informatics (Heidelberg, Germany), Johns Hopkins University, Center for Computer Integrated Surgical Systems and Technology (Baltimore, MD, USA), Medical University of Vienna, Center for Biomedical Engineering and Physics (Vienna, Austria), Queens University, Laboratory for Percutaneous Surgery (Kingston, ON, Canada)

## VIII Conclusion

When accurate localization without line-of-sight is required, EM tracking is the method of choice, and an averaged accuracy of 1.0 mm is achievable in good environments. However, an awareness of the lack of robustness against sources of distortion is necessary, because the accuracy might drop dramatically.

While several clinical EM tracked systems have emerged, so far none has reached wide clinical use. When new products are developed in the future, some of the problems of previous systems should be taken into account, notably

1. problems with workflow integration,
2. robustness problems of EM tracking,
3. cost issues with embedding sensors into clinical tools.

Some of the problems can be avoided using customized systems, however, the robustness of EM tracking can be an issue in some environments so all systems should be evaluated very carefully in clinical practice. In some situations in which an instrument must be tracked relative to an imaging probe such as US or video-endoscopy, direct image-bases tracking may be contemplated [64, 119].

In conclusion, EM tracking is useful for specific medical applications if 1) tracking without line-of-sight offers great benefits and 2) the accuracy achievable is suitable for the clinical application. Careful evaluation of an EM-based CAI system in a specific clinical context is required, risks must be analyzed and finally, the benefit for the patient demonstrated by the use of clinical trials.

## Acknowledgment

The authors would like to thank T. Bien for the insightful comments about EM tracking and helpful hints regarding interesting papers as well as A. Takacs for assistance in creating Fig. 2. The manufacturers of EM tracking systems Northern Digital Inc., Polhemus Inc., and Varian Medical Systems Inc., kindly provided pictures of their products for this publication. The authors would like to thank J. Williams for careful proofreading of the manuscript.

## References

* [1] B. D. Adelstein, E. R. Johnston, S. R. Ellis, and S. R. Ellis, "Dynamic response of electromagnetic spatial displacement trackers," _J. Presence: Teleoperant. Virt. Environ._, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 302-318, 1996.
* [2] P. T. Anderson, "Electromagnetic tracking method and system," U.S. Patent 7 782 046 28, Aug. 24, 2010.
* [3] N. Atueguw and R. Galloway, "Volumetric characterization of the Aurora magnetic tracker system for image-guided transorbital endoscopic procedures," _Phys. Med. Biol._, vol. 53, no. 16, pp. 43-55, 2008.
* [4] C. A. Aufdenblatten and S. Altermath, "Intraventricular catheter placement by electromagnetic navigation safely applied in a paediatric major head injury patient," _Child's Nervous Syst._, vol. 24, no. 9, pp. 1047-1050, 2008.
* [5] C. J. Bakker, C. Bos, and H. J. Weinmann, "Passive tracking of catheters and guidewelves by contrast-enhanced MR fluoroscopy," _Magn. Reson. Med._, vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 17-23, 2001.
* [6] J. M. Balter, J. N. Wright, L. J. Newell, B. Friemel, S. Dimmer, Y. Cheng, J. Wong, E. Vertratschitsch, and T. P. Mate, "Accuracy of a wireless localization system for radiotherapy," _Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys._, vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 933-937, 2005.
* * [7] D. C. Barrart, A. H. Davies, A. D. Hughes, S. A. Thom, and K. N. Humphries, "Optimisation and evaluation of an electromagnetic tracking device for high-accuracy three-dimensional ultrasound imaging of the carotid arteries," _Ultrasound Med. Biol._, vol. 27, no. 7, pp. 957-968, 2001.
* [8] A. Basu, C. Saupe, E. Refour, A. Raij, and K. Johnsen, "Immersive 3DUI on one dollar a day," in _Proc. IEEE Symp. 3-D User Interfaces_, 2012, pp. 97-100.
* [9] R. Bechara, C. Parks, and A. Ernst, "Electromagnetic navigation bronchoscopy," _Future Oncol._, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 31-36, 2011.
* [10] S. Beller, S. Esulenstein, T. Lange, M. Hunterbein, and P. M. Schlag, "Upgrade of an optical navigation system with a permanent electromagnetic position control: A first step towards "nuajcular control" for liver surgery," _J. Hepato-Siliary-Pancreatic Surg._, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 165-170, 2009.
* [11] E. Berkcan, "System and method for electromagnetic navigation of a magnetic field generating probe," U.S. Patent 2009/0 001 969 A1, Jan. 1, 2009.
* [12] W. J. Besz, D. P. Chorley, S. Brasted, R. A. Walker, and K. M. Walker, "Catheter locator apparatus and method of use," U.S. Patent 2004/0 087 877 A1, May 6, 2004.
* [13] T. Bien, M. Kaiser, and T. Rose, "Conductive distortion detection in AC electromagnetic tracking systems," in _Proc. Biomed. Eng._, 2011, vol. 723-064, pp. 1-6.
* [14] T. Bien and G. Rose, "Algorithm for calibration of the electromagnetic tracking system," in _Proc. IEEE EMBS Int. Conf. Biomed. Health Informat._, 2012, pp. 85-88.
* [15] T. Bien, G. Rose, and M. Skalej, "Electromagnetic tracking system for neurovascular interventions," in _Proc. 8th IASTED Int. Conf. Biomed. Eng._, 2011, p. 723.
* [16] W. Birkfellner, F. Watzinger, F. Wanschirz, G. Enisidis, C. Kollmann, D. Rafolfi, R. Nowowitz, R. Ewers, and H. Bergmann, "Systematic distortions in magnetic position digitizers," _Med. Phys._, vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 2242-2248, 1998.
* [17] W. Birkfellner, F. Watzinger, F. Wanschirz, R. Ewers, and H. Bergmann, "Calibration of tracking systems in a surgical environment," _IEEE Trans. Med. Imag._, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 737-742, Oct. 1998.
* [18] M. Birth, P. Iblher, P. Hildebrand, J. Nolde, and H. P. Bruch, "Ultrasound-guided interventions using magnetic field navigation. First experiences with ultra-guide 2000 under operative conditions," _Eur. J. Ultrasound_, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 90-95, 2003.
* [19] L. E. Bo, H. O. Leira, G. A. Tangen, E. F. Hofstad, T. Amundsen, and T. Lang, "Accuracy of electromagnetic tracking with a prototype field generator in an interventional OR setting," _Med. Phys._, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 399-406, 2012.
* [20] H. U. Boksberger, U. Greuter, S. Kirsch, P. G. Seiler, and C. Schilling, "Device and process for determining position," WO Patent 97/36 192, Jan. 2, 2002.
* [21] S. Bryson, Measurement and calibration of static distortion of position data from 3-D trackers NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA, RNR Tech. Rep. RNR-92-011, 1992.
* [22] M. J. Chen, L. X. Gu, W. J. Zhang, C. Yang, J. Zhao, Z. Y. Shao, and B. L. Wang, "Fixation, registration, image-guided navigation using a thermoplastic facial mask in electromagnetic navigation-guided radiofrequency thermooagulation," _Oral Surg., Oral Med. Oral Pathol., Oral Pathol., Endol., Endol., Endol., Endol., Endol., Endol.,_ vol. 110, no. 4, pp. 443-48, 2010.
* [23] C. L. Cheung, C. Wedlakse, J. Moore, S. E. Pautler, and T. M. Peters, "Fused video and ultrasound images for minimally invasive partial nephrectomy: A phantom study," in _Proc. of the Annual Conf. of the Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention Society (MICCAI)_. New York: Springer, 2010, vol. 13, LNCS, pp. 408-415.
* [24] S. Condino, V. Ferrari, C. Freschi, A. Alberti, R. Berchiolli, F. Mosca, and M. Ferrari, "Electromagnetic navigation platform for endovascular surgery: How to develop sensorized catheters and guidelines," _Int. J. Med. Robot. Comput. Assist. Surg._, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 300-310, 2012.
* [25] J. S. Day, G. A. Durmans, and D. J. Murdoch, "Evaluation of a long-range transmitter for use with a magnetic tracking device in motion analysis," _J. Biomechan._, vol. 31, no. 10, pp. 957-961, 1998.
* [26] J. S. Day, D. J. Murdoch, and G. A. Dumas, "Calibration of position and angular data from a magnetic tracking device," _J. Biomecha._, vol. 33, pp. 1039-1045, 2000.
* [27] C. L. Dumoulin, "Error compensation for device tracking systems employing electromagnetic fields," U.S. Patent 6 201 987, Mar. 13, 2001.
* [28] P. J. Easterbrook, J. A. Berlin, R. Gopalan, and D. R. Matthews, "Publication bias in clinical research," _Lancet_, vol. 337, no. 8746, pp. 867-872, 1991.
* [29] R. Eberhardt, D. Gompelmann, and F. J. Herth, "Electromagnetic navigation in lung cancer: Research update," _Exp. Rev. Respirat. Med._, vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 469-473, 2009.
* [30] A. T. Edwards, "Comparison of strain gage and fiber optic sensors on a sting balance in a supersonic joint tunnel," M.S. thesis, Virginia Polytech. Inst. State Univ., Blacksburg, VA, 2007.
* [31] M. Feuerstein, T. Reichl, J. Vogel, J. Traub, and N. Navab, "New approaches to online estimation of electromagnetic tracking errors for laparoscopic ultrasonography," _Comput. Aid. Surg._, vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 311-323, 2008.
* [32] M. Feuerstein, T. Reichl, J. Vogel, J. Traub, and N. Navab, "Magnetotypical tracking of flexible laparoscopic ultrasound: Model-based online detection and correction of magnetic tracking errors," _IEEE Trans. Med. Imag._, vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 951-967, Jun. 2009.
* [33] R. Feurer, C. Hennersperper, J. Runyan, C. Seifert, J. Pongratz, M. Wilhelm, J. Pelisek, N. Navab, E. Bartels, and H. Poppert, "Reliability of a freehand three-dimensional ultrasonic device allowing anatomical orientation "at a glance." Study protocol for 3-D measurements with curech CS," _J. Biomed. Graph. Comput._, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 1-10, 2012.
* [34] G. S. Fischer, "Electromagnetic tracker characterization and optimal tool design--With applications to ENT surgery," M.S. thesis, Johns Hopkins Univ., Baltimore, MD, 2005.
* [35] S. G. Fischer and R. H. Taylor, "Electromagnetic tracker measurement error simulation and tool design," in _Proc. of the Annual Conf. of the Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention Society (MICCAI)_. New York: Springer, 2005, vol. 3750, LNCS, pp. 73-80.
* [36] H. Fontenelle, R. Palomar, and O. J. Elle, "On the use of electro-magnetic tracking systems for catheter tracking in image guided surgery," in _Proc. 2nd Nat. Ph.D. Conf. Med. Imag. Annu. Med'riz Conf._, Bergen, Norway, 2011.
* [37] R. D. Foster, T. D. Solberg, H. S. Li, A. Kerkhoff, C. A. Enke, T. R. Willoughby, and P. A. Kupelian, "Comparison of transabdominal ultrasound and electromagnetic transponders for prostate localization," _J. Appl. Clin. Med. Phys._, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 2924-2938, 2010.
* [38] D. Frantz, A. D. Wiles, S. E. Leis, and S. R. Kirsch, "Accuracy assessment protocols for electromagnetic tracking systems," _Phys. Med. Biol._, vol. 48, pp. 2421-2251, 2003.
* [39] A. M. Franz, K. Marz, J. Hummel, W. Birkfellner, R. Bendl, S. Delorme, H. P. Schlemmer, H. P. Meinzer, and L. Maier-Hein, "Electromagnetic tracking for US-guided interventions: Standardized assessment of a new compact field generator," _Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg._, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 813-818, 2012.
* [40] A. M. Franz, M. Servatius, A. Seiel, B. Radcelf, H. U. Kauczor, H. P. Meinzer, and L. Maier-Hein, "Navigated targeting of liver lesions: Pitfalls of electromagnetic tracking," _Biomed. Eng._, vol. 57, pp. 897-900, 2012.
* [41] M. P. Fried, J. Kleefield, H. Gopal, E. Reardon, B. T. Ho, and F. A. Kuhn, "Image-guided endoscopic surgery: Results of accuracy and performance in a multicenter clinical study using an electromagnetic tracking system," _Laryngoscope_, vol. 107, no. 5, pp. 594-601, 1997.
* [42] C. W. Fristrup, T. Pless, J. Durup, M. B. Mortensen, H. O. Nielsen, and C. P. Hovendal, "A new method for three-dimensional laparoscopic ultrasound model reconstruction," _Surgical Endoscopy_, vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 1601-1604, 2004.
* [43] X. Ge, Y. Wang, N. Ding, X. Wu, Y. Wang, and Z. Fang, "An electromagnetic tracking method using rotating orthogonal coils," _IEEE Trans. Magn._, vol. 48, no. 12, pp. 4802-4810, Dec. 2012.
* [44] I. Gergel, J. Hering, R. Tetzlaff, H. P. Meinzer, and I. Wegner, "An electromagnetic navigation system for transhronchial interventions with a novel approach to respiratory motion compensation," _Med. Phys._, vol. 38, no. 12, pp. 6742-6753, 2011.
* [45] I. Gergel, J. Gao, M. Miller, H.-P. Meinzer, and I. Wegner, "A novel fully automatic system for the evaluation of electromagnetic tracker 2012," in _Proc. SPIE Med. Imag. Image-Guided Procedures, Robot. Intervent., Model._, 2012, vol. 8 * [49] P. Grunert, K. Darabi, J. Espinosa, and R. Filippi, "Computer-aided navigation in neurosurgery," _Neurosurg. Rev._, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 73-99, 2003.
* [50] J. G. Hagedorn, S. G. Satterfield, J. T. Kelso, W. Austin, J. E. Terrill, and A. P. Peskin, "Correction of location and orientation errors in electromagnetic motion tracking," _J. Presence: Teleoperat. Terr. Environ._, vol. 16, pp. 352-366, 2007.
* [51] T. Haidegger, G. Fenyvesi, B. Sirokai, M. Kelemen, M. Nagy, B. Takacs, L. Kovacs, B. Benoy, and Z. Beny, "Towards unified electromagnetic tracking system assessment-static errors," in _Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc._, 2011, pp. 1905-1908.
* [52] A. Hakime, F. Deschamps, E. G. De Carvalho, A. Barah, A. Auperin, and T. De Baere, "Electromagnetic-tracker biopsy under ultrasound guidance: Preliminary results," _CarloNovasc. Intervent. Radiol._, vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 898-905, 2012.
* [53] M. Hastenteufel, M. Vetter, H.-P. Meissner, and I. Wolf, "Effect of 3-D ultrasound probes on the accuracy of electromagnetic tracking systems," _Ultrasound Med. Biol._, vol. 32, no. 9, pp. 1359-1368, 2006.
* [54] R. Hauser, "Computer-aided 3-D-navig systems--A ple for an error model," _INVO_, vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 71-74, 2000.
* [55] C. Heikinan-Williams, B. Grant, X. Liu, Z. Zhang, and P. Kumar, "Accurate localization of RFID tags using phase difference," in _Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. RFID_, 2010, pp. 89-96.
* [56] P. Hildebrand, M. Klecemann, S. Schlichting, V. Martens, A. Besirevic, U. Robilck, H. P. Breuch, and C. Burk, "Prototype of an online navigation system for laparoscopic radiofrequency ablation," _Hepopaopaostroenterology_, vol. 56, no. 96, pp. 1710-1713, 2009.
* [57] H. Himberg, Y. Moati, and A. Bradley, "Interpolation volume calibration: A multisensor calibration technique for electromagnetic trackers," _IEEE Trans. Robotics_, vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 1120-1130, Oct. 2012.
* [58] M. Hoffmann, M. Schroder, W. Lehmann, M. Kammal, J. M. Rueger, and A. Herrmann Ruecker, "Next generation distal locking for intramedullary nails using an electromagnetic X-ray-radiation-free real-time navigation system," _J. Trauma Acue Care Surg._, vol. 73, no. 1, pp. 243-248, 2012.
* [59] J. Hummel, M. Figl, W. Birkfellner, M. Bax, R. Shahidi, C. Maurer, and H. Bergmann, "Evaluation of a new electromagnetic tracking system using a standardized assessment protocol," _Phys. Med. Biol._, vol. 51, no. 10, pp. N205-N210, 2006.
* [60] J. Hummel, M. Figl, M. Bax, R. Shahidi, H. Bergmann, and W. Birkfellner, "Evaluation of dynamic electromagnetic tracking deviation," in _Proc. SPIE Med. Imag.: Visualizat., Image-Guided Procedures Model._, 2009, vol. 7261, pp. 1-7.
* [61] J. B. Hummel, M. R. Bax, M. L. Figl, Y. Kang, C. Maurer, W. W. Birkfellner, H. Bergmann, and R. Shahidi, "Design and application of an assessment protocol for electromagnetic tracking systems," _Med. Phys._, vol. 32, no. 7, pp. 2371-2379, 2005.
* [62] M. Ikits, J. Brederson, C. Hansen, and J. Hollerbach, "An improved calibration framework for electromagnetic tracking devices," in _Proc. IEEE Virtual Reality_, 2001, pp. 63-70.
* [63] P. Jannin, C. Grova, and C. R. J. Mauerer, "Model for defining and reporting reference-based validation protocols in medical image processing," _Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg._, vol. 1, pp. 63-73, 2006.
* [64] U. Jayarathne, A. McLeod, T. Peters, and E. Chen, "Robust intraoperative us probe tracking using a monocular endoscopic camera," in _Proc. of the Annual Conf. of the Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention Society (MICCAI)_. New York: Springer, 2013, vol. 8151, LNCS, pp. 363-370.
* [65] T. Kapur, S. Pujol, and P. T. Anderson, "NA-MIC Wiki: Open source electromagnetic trackers [Online]. Available: http://www.na-mic.org/Wiki/index.phpOpen.Source Electromagnetic_Trackers 2013
* [66] T. Kato, T. Ohya, K. Luan, H. Liao, E. Kobayashi, and I. Sakuma, "Evaluation of the effective measurement space by analyzing the intensity distribution of the background magnetic field," _Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg._, vol. 6, pp. 275-276, 2011.
* [67] M. Kelemen, "Electromagnetic tracking system assessment and disturbance compensation," M.S. thesis, Budapest Univ. Technolo. Econ., Budapest, Hungary, 2013.
* [68] I. Khalfin and H. H. Jones, "Method and apparatus for electromagnetic position and orientation tracking with distortion compensation," U.S. Patent 6 400 139, Jun. 4, 2002.
* [69] I. Khalfin and H. R. Jones, "Method and apparatus for electromagnetic position and orientation tracking with distortion compensation employing modulated signal," U.S. Patent 6 624 626, Sep. 23, 2003.
* [70] J. J. Kim, S. L. Macicek, J. A. Decker, N. J. Kertesz, R. A. Friedman, and B. C. Cannon, "Magnetic versus manual catheter navigation for ablation of free wall accessory pathways in children," _Circulation: Arychytrian Electrophysiol._, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 804-808, 2012.
* [71] V. Kindrattenko, "Calibration of electromagnetic tracking devices," _Virt. Reality_, vol. 4, pp. 139-150, 1999.
* [72] V. Kindrattenko, "A survey of electromagnetic position tracker calibration techniques," _Virt. Reality_, vol. 5, pp. 169-182, 2000.
* [73] S. Kirsch, H. U. Oksbegger, U. Greuver, C. Schilling, and P. G. Seiler, "Real-time tracking of tumour positions for precision irradiation," in _Proc. Int. Week Handwenberg, Eur. Sci. Insit._, 1997, pp. 269-275.
* [74] S. R. Kirsch, C. Schilling, and G. Brunner, "Assessment of metallic distortions of an electromagnetic tracking system," in _Proc. Proc. SPIE Med. Imag.: Visualizat., Image-Guided Procedures, Display_, 2006, vol. 61410, pp. 1-9.
* [75] R. A. Koeckro, R. Reisch, L. Serra, L. C. Goh, E. Lee, and A. T. Stadie, "Image-guided neurosurgery with 3-dimensional multimodal imaging data on a stereoscopic monitor," _Neurosurgery_, vol. 72, pp. 78-88, 2013.
* [76] M. Koda, M. Mandai, T. Matono, T. Sugihara, T. Nagahara, M. Ueki, K. Ohyama, K. Hosho, and Y. Murawaki, "Assessment of the ablated area after radiofrequency ablation by the spread of bubbles: Comparison with virtual tomography with magnetic navigation," _Clin. Imag._, vol. 34, pp. 60-64, 2010.
* [77] M. Koda, M. Mandai, T. Matono, T. Sugihara, T. Nagahara, M. Ueki, K. Ohyama, K. Hosho, and Y. Murawaki, "Assessment of the ablated area after radiofrequency ablation by the spread of bubbles: Comparison with virtual sonography with magnetic navigation," _Etopaogas-routenberg_, vol. 58, no. 110-111, pp. 1638-1642, 2011.
* [78] W. Koele, H. Stammberger, A. Lackner, and P. Reittner, "Image guided surgery of paranasal sinuses and anterior skull base-five years experience with the InstaTrak-System," _Rinology_, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 1-9, 2002.
* [79] T. Koivukangas, J. P. Katiko, and J. P. Koivukangas, "Technical accuracy of optical and the electromagnetic tracking systems," _SpringerPlus_, vol. 2, no. 1, p. 90, Dec. 2013.
* [80] C. Kolb, A. Groch, A. Seitel, T. Kilgus, R. Bendl, H. Meinzer, and L. Maier-Hein, "Simultaneous localization and soft-tissue shape recovery with a time of flight pathoscope for computer-assisted surgery," in _Proc. 27th Int. Congr. Exhibit. Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg._, 2013, vol. 8, pp. 109-113.
* [81] B. G. P. Koot, H. Westerholt, M. A. Benninga, A. C. E. M. Duflou, L. C. M. Singels, R. R. van Rijn, and E. M. H. Mathus-Vliegen, "Electromagnetic-guided postsynaptic tube placement in children: Pilot study of its use as a rescue therapy," _Eur. e-Journal Clin. Nutri. Metabol._, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 74-76, 2011.
* [82] D. T. Korting, "Versepla keynet system zur digitalen postionsbestimmung von elektrodten und kopopforbeflichenkupnet," Ph.D. dissertation, Heidelberg Univ., Heidelberg, Germany, 2007.
* [83] B. J. Kroger, M. Pouplier, and M. K. Tiede, "An evaluation of the Aurora system as a flesh-point tracking tool for speech production research," _J. Speech, Language, Hear. Res._, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 914-921, 2008.
* [84] G. A. Krombach, J. Tacke, A. Rubben, S. Haller, and R. W. Gunther, "Magnetic-field-based navigation system for ultrasound-guided interventions," _RoeFo: Fortschritte and dembeider der Rongeensrahlen und hidegenden Verfahren_, vol. 171, no. 5, pp. 386-390, 1999.
* [85] J. Krucker, S. Xu, A. Viswanathan, E. Shen, N. Glossop, and B. Wood, "Clinical evaluation of electromagnetic tracking for biopsy and radiofrequency ablation guidance," _Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg._, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 1, pp. 169-171, 2006.
* [86] J. Krucker, S. Xu, N. Glossop, A. Viswanathan, J. Borgert, H. Schulz, and B. J. Wood, "Electromagnetic tracking for thermal ablation and biopsy guidance: Clinical evaluation of spatial accuracy," _J. Vasc. Intervent. Radiol._, vol. 18, pp. 1141-1150, 2007.
* [87] J. B. Kuipers, "SPASYN--An electromagnetic relative position and orientation tracking system," _IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas._, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 46 * [90] Y. Kwok and S. Yovino, "Update on radiation-based therapies for prostate cancer," _Current Opin. Oncol._, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 257-262, 2010.
* [91] M. M. Lagana, L. Forzoni, S. Viotti, S. De Beni, G. Baselli, and P. Cecconi, "Assessment of the cerebral venous system from the transcombar ultrasound window using virtual navigator technology and MRI," in _Proc. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc._, 2011, vol. 2011, pp. 579-582.
* [92] S. LaScalza, J. Arico, and R. Hughes, "Effect of metal and sampling rate on accuracy of Flock of Birds electromagnetic tracking system," _J. Biomechan._, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 141-144, 2003.
* [93] D. G. Latcu, S. S. Bun, P. Ricard, and N. Saoudi, "Hepatoc-tricuspid isthmus ablation for typical-like atrial flutter by femoral approach in absence of the inferior vena cava: Use of magnetic navigation and three-dimensional mapping with image integration," _Pacing Clin. Electrophysiol._, vol. 35, no. 11, pp. 512-513, 2012.
* [94] S. Leong, H. Ju, H. Marshall, R. Bowman, I. Yang, A. M. Ree, C. Saxon, and K. M. Fong, "Electromagnetic navigation bronchoscopy: A descriptive analysis," _J. Thoracic Disease_, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 173-185, 2012.
* [95] E. B. Levy, J. Tang, D. Lindisch, N. Glossop, F. Banovac, and K. Cleary, "Implementation of an electromagnetic tracking system for accurate intrahepatic puncture needle guidance: Accuracy results in an _in vitro_ model," _Acad. Radiol._, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 344-354, 2007.
* [96] A. W. Lin, A. L. Trejos, S. Mohan, H. Bassan, A. Kashighar, R. V. Patel, and R. A. Mathamher, "Electromagnetic navigation improves minimally invasive robot-assisted lung brachytherapy," _Comput. Aid. Surg._, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 114-123, 2008.
* [97] C. A. Linte, P. Lang, M. E. Rettmann, D. S. Cho, D. R. Holmes, R. A. Robb, and T. M. Peters, "Accuracy considerations in image-guided cardiac interventions: Experience and lessons learned," _Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg._, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 13-25, 2012.
* [98] E. Liodakis, K. Chu, R. Westphal, C. Krettek, M. Citak, T. Gosling, and M. Kenawey, "Assessment of the accuracy of infrared and electromagnetic navigation using an industrial robot: Which factors are influencing the accuracy of navigation?," _J. Orthopaedic Res._, vol. 29, no. 10, pp. 1476-1483, 2011.
* [99] D. R. Lionberger, J. Weise, D. M. Ho, and J. L. Haddad, "How does electromagnetic navigation stack up against infrared navigation in minimally invasive total knee arthroplasty?," _J. Arthroplasty_, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 573-580, 2008.
* [100] F. Y. Liu, X. Lv, P. Liang, Z. G. Cheng, Z. Y. Han, B. W. Dong, and X. H. Zhang, "Microwave ablation assisted by a real-time virtual navigation system for hepatocellular carcinoma undetectable by conventional ultrasonography," _Eur. J. Radiol._, vol. 81, no. 7, pp. 1455-1459, 2012.
* [101] Y. Liu, Y. Wang, D. Zhou, X. Hu, and J. Wu, "Study on an experimental AC electromagnetic tracking system," in _Proc. 5th World Congr. Intell. Control Automat._, 2004, vol. 4, pp. 3692-3695.
* [102] L. Maier-Hein, A. M. Franz, W. Birkfellner, J. Hummel, I. Gergel, I. Wegner, and H. P. Meiner, "Standardized assessment of new electromagnetic field generators in an international radiology setting," _Med. Phys._, vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 3424-3434, 2012.
* [103] F. Mansd-Hulasa, G. A. Tangen, T. Dahl, T. A. Hermes, and P. Aadahl, "Three-dimensional electromagnetic navigation vs. fluoroscopy for endovascular aneurysm repair: A prospective feasibility study in patients," _J. Endowasc. Ther._, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 70-78, 2012.
* [104] T. P. Mate, D. Krag, J. N. Wright, and S. Dimmer, "A new system to perform continuous target tracking for radiation and surgery using non-ionizing alternating current electromagnetics," in _Proc. 18th Int. Congr. Exhibit._, 2004, vol. 1268, pp. 425-430.
* [105] E. M. Mathus-Vliegen, A. Duflou, M. B. Spanier, and P. Fockens, "Nanospectral feeding tube placement by nurses using an electromagnetic guidance system," _Gaussianized Endoscopy_, vol. 71, no. 4, pp. 728-736, 2010.
* [106] K. L. Meert and N. Metheny, "Placement of postyloric tubes using electromagnetic guidance," _Pediatric Crit. Care Med._, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 271-273, 2009.
* [107] C. Meskers, H. Fraternran, F. van der Helm, H. Vermeulen, and P. Rozing, "Calibration of the "Flock of Birds" electromagnetic tracking device and its application in shoulder motion studies," _J. Biomechan._, vol. 32, pp. 629-633, 1999.
* [108] R. Meson, R. E. Gliklich, and M. Cosenza, "A comparison of image guidance systems for sinus surgery," _Laryngoscope_, vol. 108, no. 8(1), pp. 1164-1170, 1998.
* [109] B. C. Meyer, O. Peter, M. Nagel, M. Hoheisel, B. B. Frericks, K.-J. Wolf, and F. K. Wacker, "Electromagnetic field-based navigation for percutaneous punctures on C-arm CT: Experimental evaluation and clinical application," _Eur. Radiol._, vol. 18, pp. 2855-2864, 2008.
* [110] A. D. Milne, D. G. Chess, J. A. Johnson, and G. J. King, "Accuracy of an electromagnetic tracking device: A study of the optimal range and metal interference," _J. Biomechan._, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 791-793, 1996.
* [111] Y. Minami, H. Chung, M. Kudo, S. Kitai, S. Takahashi, T. Inoue, K. Ueshima, and H. Shiozaki, "Radiofrequency ablation of hepatocellular carcinoma: Value of virtual CT sonography with magnetic navigation," _Am. J. Roengengenol._, vol. 190, no. 6, pp. 335-341, 2008.
* [112] Y. Minami, S. Kitai, and M. Kudo, "Treatment response assessment of radiofrequency ablation for hepatocellular carcinoma: Usefulness of virtual CT sonography with magnetic navigation," _Eur. J. Radiol._, vol. 81, no. 3, pp. e277-280, 2012.
* [113] J. T. Moore, W. W. Chu, B. Kiaii, D. Bainbridge, G. Guiraudon, C. Wedlake, M. Currie, M. Raioli, R. V. Patel, and T. M. Peters, "A navigation platform for guidance of beating heart transpairal mitral valve repair," _IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng._, vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 1034-1040, Apr. 2013.
* [114] A. Mor, "Accuracy of dynamic electromagnetic tracking," _J. Biomechan._, vol. 39, pp. 556-557, 2006.
* [115] K. Mori, D. Deguchi, K. Akiyama, T. Kitasaka, C. R. Maurer, Y. Suenaga, H. Takabatake, M. Mori, and H. Natori, "Hybrid bronchoscope tracking using a magnetic tracking sensor and image registration," in _Proc. of the Annual Conf. of the Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention Society (MICCAI)_. New York: Springer, 2005, vol. 8, LNCS, pp. 543-550.
* [116] P. Moumtney, D. Syouany, and G.-Z. Yang, "Three-dimensional tissue deformation recovery and tracking," _IEEE Signal Process. Mag._, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 14-24, Jul. 2010.
* [117] J. Much, "Error classification and propagation for electromagnetic tracking," M.S. thesis, Tech. Univ. Manchen, Munich, Germany, 2008.
* [118] D. Mucha, B. Kosmeeki, and J. Bier, "Plausibility check for error compensation in electromagnetic navigation in endoscopic sinus surgery," in _Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Exhibit. Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg._, 2006, vol. 1, pp. 316-318.
* [119] J. Mung, F. Vignon, and A. Jain, "A non-disumptive technology for robust 3-D tool tracking for ultrasound-guided interventions," in _Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS), Proc. of the Annual Conf. of the Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention Society (MICCAI)_. New York: Springer, 2011, vol. 14, pp. 153-160.
* [120] M. J. Murphy, R. Eidens, E. Vertaschitsch, and J. N. Wright, "The effect of transmodern motion on the accuracy of the Calypso Electromagnetic localization system," _Int. J. Radiol._, vol. 72, no. 1, pp. 295-299, 2008.
* [121] C. Nafis, V. Jensen, L. Beauregard, and P. Anderson, "Method for estimating dynamic CT tracking accuracy of surgical navigation tools," in _Proc. SPIE Med. Imag. Visualization., Image-Guided Procedures Model._, 2006, vol. 6141, pp. 152-167.
* [122] C. Nafis, V. Jensen, and R. von Jako, "Method for evaluating compatibility of commercial electromagnetic (EM) microsensor tracking systems with surgical and imaging tables," in _Proc. SPIE Med. Imag.-Visualizat., Image-Guided Procedures Model._, 2008, vol. 69182, pp. 1-15.
* [123] M. Nagel, M. Hoheisel, R. Petzold, W. A. Kalender, and U. H. W. Krause, "Needle and catheter navigation using electromagnetic tracking for computer-assisted C-arm CT interventions," in _Proc. SPIE Med. Imag.: Visualizat. Image-Guided Procedures_, 2007, vol. 6590, pp. 1-9.
* [124] M. Nakamoto, K. Nakada, Y. Sato, K. Konishi, M. Hashizume, and S. Tamura, "Intraoperative magnetic tracker calibration using a magneto-optic hybrid tracker for 3-d ultrasound-based navigation in laparoscopic surgery," _IEEE Trans. Med. Imag._, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 255-270, Feb. 2008.
* [125] S. Nakano, M. Yoshida, K. Fujii, K. Yorozuya, J. Kousaka, Y. Mouri, T. Fukutomi, Y. Ohshima, J. Kimura, and T. Ishiguchi, "Real-time visual sonography, a coordinated sonography and MRI system that uses magnetic navigation, improves the sonographic identification of enhancing lesions on breast MRI," _Ultrasound Med. Biol._, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 42-49, 2012.
* [126 * [127] C. K. Narsule, R. Sales Dos Santos, A. Gupta, M. I. Ebright, R. Rivas, B. D. Daly, and H. C. Fernando, "The efficacy of electromagnetic navigation to assist with computed tomography-guided percutaneous thermal ablation of lung tumors," _Innovations (Philab)_, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 187-190, 2012.
* [128] M. A. Nixon, B. C. McCallum, W. R. Fright, and N. B. Price, "The effects of metals and interfering fields on electromagnetic trackers," _J. Presence: Teleoperators Virt. Environ._, vol. 7, pp. 204-218, 1998.
* [129] T. W. Orober and G. E. Hardar, "Successful placement of postyloric enteral tubes using electromagnetic guidance in critically ill children," _Pediatric Crit. Care Med._, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 196-200, 2009.
* [130] N. Pagoulatos, R. N. Rohling, W. S. Edwards, and Y. Kim, "New spatial localizer based on fiber optics with applications in 3-D ultrasound imaging," in _Proc. SPIE Med. Imagi. 2000: Image Display Visualitat._, 2000, vol. 3976, pp. 595-602.
* [131] C. Pappone, G. Vicedomini, F. Manguso, F. Gugliotta, P. Mazzone, S. Gulletta, N. Sora, S. Sala, A. Marzi, G. Augello, L. Livolsi, A. Santagostiu, and V. Santinelli, "Robotic magnetic navigation for atrial fibrillation ablation," _J. Am. Coll. Cardiol._, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 1390-1400, 2006.
* [132] V. Patil, R. S. J. Estepar, C. J. Walsh, and K. G. Vosburgh, "Dynamic CT scanner environment effects on a DC electromagnetic tracking system," in _Proc. 23th Int. Congress Exhibit. Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg._, 2009, vol. 4, pp. 339-340.
* [133] O. Pauly, H. Heibel, and N. Navab, "A machine learning approach for deformable guide-wire tracking in Macroscopic sequences," in _Proc. of the Annual Conf. the Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention Society (MICCAI)_. New York: Springer, 2010, vol. 13, LNCS, pp. 343-350.
* [134] Y. P. Peng, S. T. Qi, G. Zheng, J. L. Zhao, and B. H. Qiu, "Application of electromagnetic navigation in surgical treatment of intracranial tumors: Analysis of 12 cases," _Acad. J. 1st Med Coll._, vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 662-662, 2002.
* [135] T. Penzkofer, P. Bruners, P. Isfort, F. Schoth, R. Gunther, T. Schmitz-Rode, and A. Mahlen, "Free-hand CT-based electromagnetically guided interventions: Accuracy, efficiency and dose usage," _Minimally Invasive Therapy Allied Technol._, vol. 20, pp. 226-233, 2011.
* [136] D. Perie, A. Tate, P. Cheng, and G. Dumas, "Evaluation and calibration of an electromagnetic tracking device for biomechanical analysis of lifting tasks," _J. Biomechat._, vol. 35, pp. 293-397, 2002.
* [137] T. Peters and K. Cleary, Eds., _Image-Guided Interventions: Technology and Applications_. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 2008.
* [138] G. Placidi, D. Franchi, A. Maurizi, and A. Sotgiu, "Review on patents about magnetic localisation systems for in-vivo catheterizations," _Recent Patents Biomed. Eng._, vol. 2, pp. 58-64, 2009.
* [139] A. Plotkin, V. Kucher, Y. Horein, and E. Pappone, "A new calibration procedure for magnetic tracking systems," _IEEE Trans. Magn._, vol. 44, no. 11, pp. 4525-4528, Nov. 2008.
* [140] A. Plotkin and E. Pappone, "3-D magnetic tracking of a single sub-miniature coil with a large 2-D array of uniaxial transmitters," _IEEE Trans. Magn._, vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 3295-3297, Sep. 2003.
* [141] F. Poulin and L. Amiot, "Interference during the use of an EM tracking system under OR conditions," _J. of Biomechanics_, vol. 35, pp. 733-737, 2002.
* [142] NDI to demonstrate new aurora field generators at CARS 2009 Northern Digital. Waterloo, ON, Canada, 2009.
* [143] 3-D Guidance medSAFE Ascension Technol.. Burlington, VT, 2008.
* [144] CARTO XP--Electomomational navigation system Biosense Webster. Diamond Bar, CA, 2004.
* [145] Ligoie--The smart way to hit the target superDimension Inc. Minneapolis, MN, 2009.
* [146] Parts catalog--Medtronic navigation 2010 Medtronic Navigation. Minneapolis, MN, 2009.
* [147] Pollemus--Accessories Pollemus. Colchester, VT, 2004.
* [148] F. Raab, E. Blood, T. Steiner, and H. Jones, "Magnetic position and orientation tracking system," _IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst._, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 709-718, Sep. 1979.
* [149] T. Reichl, J. Gardiazabal, and N. Navab, "Electromagnetic serving--A new tracking paradigm," _IEEE Trans. Med. Imag._, vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 1526-1535, Aug. 2013.
* [150] H. Ren and P. Kazanzides, "Investigation of attitude tracking using an integrated inertial and magnetic navigation system for hand-held surgical instruments," _IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron._, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 210-217, Apr. 2012.
* [151] H. Ren and P. Kazanzides, "A paired-orientation alignment problem in a hybrid tracking system for computer assisted surgery," _J. Intell. Robot. Syst._, vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 151-161, 2011.
* [152] D. C. Ribeiro, G. Soje, J. H. Abbott, and S. Milosavljevic, "The reliability and accuracy of an electromagnetic motion analysis system when used conjointly with an accelerometer," _Ergonomics_, vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 672-677, 2011.
* [153] W. M. Ricci, T. A. Russell, D. M. Kahler, L. Terrill-Grisoni, and P. Cullley, "A comparison of optical and electromagnetic computer-assisted navigation systems for fluoroscopic targeting," _J. Orthopaedic Trauma_, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 190-194, 2008.
* [154] P. Risholm, E. Narum, O. Elle, and E. Samset, "An inexpensive and portable system for improving ER tracking accuracy," _Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg._, vol. 181-182, 2007.
* [155] T. Rodt, G. Koppen, M. Lorenz, O. Majdani, M. Leinung, S. Bartling, J. Kaminsky, and J. K. Krauss, "Placement of intraventricular catheters using flexible electromagnetic navigation and a dynamic reference frame: A new technique," _Sterrootactic Funct. Neurosurg._, vol. 85, no. 5, pp. 243-248, 2007.
* [156] T. Saleh, V. V. Kindrateko, and W. R. Sherman, "On using neural networks to calibrate electromagnetic tracking systems Nat. Center Supercomput. Appl. Univ. Illinois Urbana-Champaign. , Champaign, IL, Tech. Rep., 2000.
* [157] H. M. Sandler, P. Y. Liu, R. L. Dunn, D. C. Khan, S. E. Tropper, M. G. Sanda, and C. A. Mantz, "Reduction in patient-reported acute mobility in prostate cancer patients treated with 81-Gy intensity-modulated radiotherapy using reduced planning target volume margins and electromagnetic tracking: Assessing the impact of margin reduction study," _Urology_, vol. 75, no. 5, pp. 1004-1008, 2010.
* [158] T. Sampechuda and L. Kovavisrauch, "A review of RFID localization: Applications and techniques," in _Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Electr. Eng./Electron., Comput., Telecommun. Inf. Technol._, 2008, vol. 2, pp. 769-772.
* [159] L. Santanam, C. Noel, T. Willoughby, J. Esthappan, S. Munic, E. Klein, D. Low, and P. Farhik, "Quality assurance for clinical implementation of an electromagnetic tracking system," _Med. Phys._, vol. 36, pp. 3477-3486, 2009.
* [160] R. S. Santos, A. Gupta, M. I. Ebright, M. DeSimone, G. Steiner, M. J. Estrada, B. Daly, and H. C. Fernando, "Electromagnetic navigation to aid radiofrequency ablation and biopsy of lung tumors," _Ann. Thoracic Surg._, vol. 89, no. 1, pp. 265-268, 2010.
* [161] N. Saoudi, P. Ricard, and K. Yaxici, "Magnetic navigation and voltage mapping guided implantation of a pacemaker atrial lead in a previously unpaceable patient," _EuroImage_, vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 1194-1195, 2007.
* [162] K. Schicho, M. Figl, M. Donat, W. Birkfellner, R. Seemann, A. Wagner, H. Bergmann, and R. Ewers, "Stability of miniature electromagnetic tracking systems," _Phys. Med. Biol._, vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 2089-2098, 2005.
* [163] R. Schimpf, T. Rents, G. Hessling, I. Deisenhofer, A. Plaumer, H. Estner, J. Wu, E. Ucer, B. Zremner, T. Sueschebeck, J. Kuschyk, C. Vellmann, M. Borggerke, and V. Wolpert, "Magnetic navigation in invasive electrophysiological diagnostic and therapy," _Herzesktrumacherberhojejejeje * [171] S. B. Solomon, C. A. Magee, D. E. Acker, and A. C. Venhux, "Experimental nonfluoroscopic placement of inferior vena cava filters: Use of an electromagnetic navigation system with previous CT data," _J. Nasc. Intervent. Radiol._, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 92-95, 1999.
* [172] E. K. Song, J. K. Seon, S. J. Park, and T. R. Yoon, "Accuracy of navigation: A comparative study of infrared optical and electromagnetic navigation," _Orthopedics_, vol. 31, pp. 1-7, 2008.
* [173] T. D. Soper, D. R. Haynor, R. W. Glenny, and E. J. Seibel, _In vivo_ validation of a hybrid tracking system for navigation of an ultrathin bronchoscope within peripheral airways," _IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng._, vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 736-745, Mar. 2010.
* [174] O. Suess, T. Kombos, R. Kurth, S. Suess, S. Mularski, S. Hammersen, and M. Brock, "Intracranial image-guided neurosurgery: Experience with a new electromagnetic navigation system," _Acta Neurochirigica_, vol. 143, no. 9, pp. 927-934, 2001.
* [175] M. Szrra, K. Buck, A. Matyja, and J. Kulig, "Evaluation of magnetic scope navigation in screening endoscopic examination of colorectal cancer," _Surg. Endosc._, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 632-638, 2012.
* [176] S. Thinegurtsvargom, D. Junsese, and A. Tanzvale, "A comparison of blood loss in minimally invasive surgery with and without electromagnetic computer navigation in total knee arthroplasty," _J. Med. Assoc. Thailand_, vol. 29, pp. 27-32, 2009.
* [177] C. Thomram, "Fast and efficient error correction of electromagnetic tracking and its application in prostate cancer treatment," M.S. thesis, Tech. Univ. Manchen, Munich, Germany, 2007.
* [178] A. S. Thornton, M. Maximo Rivero-Jeyrera, and L. J. Jordaens, "Magnetic assisted navigation in electrophysiology and cardiac resynchronization: A review," _J. Indian Pacing Electrophysiol._, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 202-213, 2006.
* [179] D. Tigani, M. Busacca, A. Moio, E. Rimondi, N. Del Piccolo, and G. Sabbioni, "Preliminary experience with electromagnetic navigation system in TKA," _Knee_, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 33-38, 2009.
* [180] P. Tipler, _Physics for Scientists and Engineers: Vol. 2: Electricity and Magnetism, Light_. New York: W. H. Freeman, 1998.
* [181] J. Traub, S. Kaur, P. Kneschrauder, and N. Navab, "Evaluation of electromagnetic error correction methods," in _Proc. Biliberwetherning fur die Medizin, Informatik aknell_, 2007, pp. 363-367.
* [182] R. Tung, K. Shivkumar, and R. Mandapati, "Ablation of post transplant atrial flutter and pseudo-fibrillation using magnetic navigation via a superior approach," _J. Indian Pacing Electrophysiol._, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 229-232, 2012.
* [183] A. M. Venkatesan, S. Kadoury, N. Abi-Jaoudeh, E. B. Levy, R. Maass-Moreno, J. Krucker, S. Dalal, S. Xu, N. Glossop, and B. J. Wood, "Real-time FDG PET guidance during biopsies and radiofrequency ablation using multimodality fusion with electromagnetic navigation," _Radiology_, vol. 260, no. 3, pp. 848-856, 2011.
* [184] L. Volpi, A. Pistochini, M. Bignanni, F. Molin, M. Turr Zanoni, and P. Castelnuovo, "A novel technique for tailoring frontal osteoplastic flags using the ENT magnetic navigation system," _Acta Otolaryngol._, vol. 132, no. 6, pp. 645-650, 2012.
* [185] R. A. von Jako, J. A. Carrino, K. S. Yonemura, G. A. Noda, W. Zhue, D. Blaskievicz, M. Raque, D. E. Grossmann, and G. Weber, "Electromagnetic navigation for percutaneous guide-wire insertion: Accuracy and efficiency compared to conventional fluoroscopic guidance," _Neuroimage_, vol. 47, pp. S127-132, 2009.
* [186] M. J. Wallace, S. Gupta, and M. E. Hicks, "Out-of-plane computed-to-mography-guided biopsy using a magnetic-field-based navigation system," _Cardiovascular Internet. Radiol._, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 108-113, 2006.
* [187] B. Wang, J. D. Tward, and B. J. Salter, "An evaluation of interference of inflatable penile prostheses with electromagnetic localization and tracking system," _Med. Phys._, vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 4807-4811, 2012.
* [188] I. Wegner, D. Teber, B. Hadaschik, S. Pahemik, M. Hohenfellner, H.-P. Meissner, and J. Huber, "Pitfalls of electromagnetic tracking in clinical routine using multiple adjacent sensors," _Int. J. Med. Robot. Comput. Assist. Surg._, 2012.
* [189] A. D. Wiles, D. G. Thomson, and D. D. Frantz, "Accuracy assessment and interpretation for optical tracking systems," in _Proc. SPIE Med. Imag. 2004, Visualization., Image-Guided Proced., Display_, 2004, vol. 5367, pp. 421-432.
* [190] D. Wilhelm, H. Faussner, A. Schneider, and J. Harms, "Electromagnetically navigated laparoscopic ultrasound," _Surg. Technol. Int._, vol. 11, pp. 50-54, 2003.
* [191] A. Wille, M. Broll, and S. Winter, "Phase difference based RFID navigation for medical applications," in _Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. RFID_, 2011, pp. 98-105.
* [192] A. J. Williams, R. Fraser, D. P. Chorley, and J. Dent, "The Cathlocator: A novel non-radiological method for the localization of enteral tubes," _J. Gastroenterol. Hepatol._, vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 500-505, 1996.
* [193] T. R. Willoughby, P. A. Kupelian, J. Poulitot, K. Shinohara, M. Aubin, M. Roach, L. L. Skrumeda, J. M. Balter, D. W. Litzenberg, S. W. Hadley, J. T. Wei, and H. M. Sandler, "Target localization and real-time tracking using the Celvapo Alocalization system in patients with localized prostate cancer," _Int. J. Radiat. Oncol., Biol., Phys._, vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 528-534, 2006.
* [194] E. Wilson, "Accuracy analysis of electromagnetic tracking within medical environments," Ph.D. dissertation, Georgetown Univ., Washington DC, 2006.
* [195] E. Wilson, Z. Yaniv, D. Lindisch, and K. Cleary, "A buyer's guide to electromagnetic tracking systems for clinical applications," in _Proc. SPIE Med. Imag., Visualizat., Image-Guided Proced., Display_, 2008, vol. 6918, pp. 1-12.
* [196] E. Wilson, Z. Yaniv, H. Zhang, C. Nafis, E. Shen, G. Shechter, A. D. Wiles, T. Peters, D. Lindisch, and K. Cleary, "A hardware and software protocol for the evaluation of electromagnetic tracker accuracy in the clinical environment: A multi-center study," in _Proc. SPIE Med. Imag., Visualizat. Image-Guided Proced._, 2007, vol. 6509, pp. 1-11.
* [197] S. W. Wong, A. U. Niiazi, K. J. Chin, and V. V. Chan, "Real-time ultrasound-guided spinal anesthesia using the SoniGPS needle tracking system: A case report," _Can. J. anesthesia_, vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 50-53, 2013.
* [198] B. J. Wood, J. Krucker, N. Abi-Jaoudeh, J. K. Locklin, E. Levy, S. Xu, L. Solbiati, A. Kapoor, H. Amalou, and A. M. Venkatesan, "Navigation systems for ablation," _J. Vasc. Intervent. Radiol._, vol. 21, no. 8, pp. S257-263, 2010.
* [199] B. Wood, H. Zhang, A. Durrani, N. Glossop, S. Ranjan, D. Lindisch, E. Levy, F. Banovae, J. Borgert, S. Krueger, J. Krucker, A. Viswanathan, and K. Cleary, "Navigation with electromagnetic tracking for interventional radiology procedures: A feasibility study," _J. Nasc. Intervent. Radiol._, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 493-505, 2005.
* [199] C. D. Wray, D. L. Kreemer, T. Yang, S. L. Poliachik, A. L. Ko, A. Poliakov, A. O. Hebb, E. J. Novotny, and J. G. Ojemann, "Freehand placement of depth electrodes using electromagnetic framerless stereotactic guidance," _J. Neurosurg., Pediatrics_, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 464-467, 2011.
* [190] N. Wright and L. Newell, "Apparatus for locating a wireless implantable marker," WO Patent 2004/060 177 A1, Jul. 22, 2004.
* [191] X. Wu and R. Taylor, "A direction space interpolation technique for calibration of electromagnetic surgical navigation systems," in _Proc. of the Annual Conf. of the Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention Society (MICCAI)_. New York: Springer, 2003, vol. 2879, LNCS, pp. 215-222.
* [192] X. Wu and R. Taylor, "A framework for calibration of electromagnetic surgical navigation system," in _Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst._, 2003, vol. 1, pp. 547-552.
* [193] W. Wynn, "Advanced superconducting gradiometer/Magnetometer arrays and a novel signal processing technique," _IEEE Trans. Magn._, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 701-707, 1975.
* [194] H. X. Xu, M. D. Lu, L. N. Liu, and L. H. Guo, "Magnetic navigation in ultrasound-guided interventional radiology procedures," _Clin. Radiol._, vol. 67, no. 5, pp. 447-454, 2012.
* [195] Z. Yaniv, E. Wilson, D. Lindisch, and K. Cleary, "Electromagnetic tracking in the clinical environment," _Med. Phys._, vol. 36, pp. 876-892, 2009.
* [196] J. Yoo, S. Schafer, A. Uneri, Y. Otake, A. J. Khanna, and J. H. Siewerden, "An electromagnetic "tracker-in-table" configuration for x-ray fluoroscopy and cone-beam CT-guided surgery," _Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg._, vol. 8, pp. 1-13, 2013.
* [197] M. Zaaroor, Y. Bejerano, Z. Weinfeld, and S. Ben-Haim, "Novel magnetic technology for intraoperative intracranial framless navigation: _In vivo and in vitro_ results," _Neurosurgery_, vol. 48, no. 5, pp. 1100-1107, 2001.

 